 		Web Video Texts Audio Projects About Account TVNews OpenLibrary 
	 
Home 	American Libraries | Canadian Libraries | Universal Library | Community Texts | Project Gutenberg | Children's Library | Biodiversity Heritage Library | Additional Collections 
Search:    Advanced Search 	 Anonymous User  (login or  join us) 	Upload 

See other formats 
 Full text of "Crime And Punishment 8-bit text (with accented letters)" 
The Project Gutenberg Etext Crime and Punishment, by Dostoevsky

#4 in our series by Fyodor Dostoevsky





We are releasing two versions of this Etext, one in 7-bit format,

known as Plain Vanilla ASCII, which can be sent via plain email--

and one in 8-bit format, which includes higher order characters--

which requires a binary transfer, or sent as email attachment and

may require more specialized programs to display the accents.



This is the 8-bit version.





Copyright laws are changing all over the world, be sure to check

the copyright laws for your country before posting these files!!



Please take a look at the important information in this header.

We encourage you to keep this file on your own disk, keeping an

electronic path open for the next readers.  Do not remove this.





**Welcome To The World of Free Plain Vanilla Electronic Texts**



**Etexts Readable By Both Humans and By Computers, Since 1971**



*These Etexts Prepared By Hundreds of Volunteers and Donations*



Information on contacting Project Gutenberg to get Etexts, and

further information is included below.  We need your donations.





Title:  Crime and Punishment



Author:  Fyodor Dostoevsky



March, 2001  [Etext #2554]





The Project Gutenberg Etext Crime and Punishment, by Dostoevsky

*****This file should be named 8crmp10.txt or 8crmp10.zip******



Corrected EDITIONS of our etexts get a new NUMBER, 8crmp11.txt

VERSIONS based on separate sources get new LETTER, 8crmp10a.txt





Etext prepared by John Bickers, jbickers@ihug.co.nz

and Dagny, dagnyj@hotmail.com



Project Gutenberg Etexts are usually created from multiple editions,

all of which are in the Public Domain in the United States, unless a

copyright notice is included.  Therefore, we usually do NOT keep any

of these books in compliance with any particular paper edition.





We are now trying to release all our books one month in advance

of the official release dates, leaving time for better editing.



Please note:  neither this list nor its contents are final till

midnight of the last day of the month of any such announcement.

The official release date of all Project Gutenberg Etexts is at

Midnight, Central Time, of the last day of the stated month.  A

preliminary version may often be posted for suggestion, comment

and editing by those who wish to do so.  To be sure you have an

up to date first edition [xxxxx10x.xxx] please check file sizes

in the first week of the next month.  Since our ftp program has

a bug in it that scrambles the date [tried to fix and failed] a

look at the file size will have to do, but we will try to see a

new copy has at least one byte more or less.





Information about Project Gutenberg (one page)



We produce about two million dollars for each hour we work.  The

time it takes us, a rather conservative estimate, is fifty hours

to get any etext selected, entered, proofread, edited, copyright

searched and analyzed, the copyright letters written, etc.  This

projected audience is one hundred million readers.  If our value

per text is nominally estimated at one dollar then we produce $2

million dollars per hour this year as we release thirty-six text

files per month, or 432 more Etexts in 1999 for a total of 2000+

If these reach just 10% of the computerized population, then the

total should reach over 200 billion Etexts given away this year.



The Goal of Project Gutenberg is to Give Away One Trillion Etext

Files by December 31, 2001.  [10,000 x 100,000,000 = 1 Trillion]

This is ten thousand titles each to one hundred million readers,

which is only ~5% of the present number of computer users.



At our revised rates of production, we will reach only one-third

of that goal by the end of 2001, or about 3,333 Etexts unless we

manage to get some real funding; currently our funding is mostly

from Michael Hart's salary at Carnegie-Mellon University, and an

assortment of sporadic gifts; this salary is only good for a few

more years, so we are looking for something to replace it, as we

don't want Project Gutenberg to be so dependent on one person.



We need your donations more than ever!





All donations should be made to "Project Gutenberg/CMU": and are

tax deductible to the extent allowable by law.  (CMU = Carnegie-

Mellon University).



For these and other matters, please mail to:



Project Gutenberg

P. O. Box  2782

Champaign, IL 61825



When all other email fails. . .try our Executive Director:

Michael S. Hart <hart@pobox.com>

hart@pobox.com forwards to hart@prairienet.org and archive.org

if your mail bounces from archive.org, I will still see it, if

it bounces from prairienet.org, better resend later on. . . .



We would prefer to send you this information by email.



******



To access Project Gutenberg etexts, use any Web browser

to view http://promo.net/pg.  This site lists Etexts by

author and by title, and includes information about how

to get involved with Project Gutenberg.  You could also

download our past Newsletters, or subscribe here.  This

is one of our major sites, please email hart@pobox.com,

for a more complete list of our various sites.



To go directly to the etext collections, use FTP or any

Web browser to visit a Project Gutenberg mirror (mirror

sites are available on 7 continents; mirrors are listed

at http://promo.net/pg).



Mac users, do NOT point and click, typing works better.



Example FTP session:



ftp sunsite.unc.edu

login: anonymous

password: your@login

cd pub/docs/books/gutenberg

cd etext90 through etext99

dir [to see files]

get or mget [to get files. . .set bin for zip files]

GET GUTINDEX.??  [to get a year's listing of books, e.g., GUTINDEX.99]

GET GUTINDEX.ALL [to get a listing of ALL books]



***



**Information prepared by the Project Gutenberg legal advisor**



(Three Pages)





***START**THE SMALL PRINT!**FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN ETEXTS**START***

Why is this "Small Print!" statement here?  You know: lawyers.

They tell us you might sue us if there is something wrong with

your copy of this etext, even if you got it for free from

someone other than us, and even if what's wrong is not our

fault.  So, among other things, this "Small Print!" statement

disclaims most of our liability to you.  It also tells you how

you can distribute copies of this etext if you want to.



*BEFORE!* YOU USE OR READ THIS ETEXT

By using or reading any part of this PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm

etext, you indicate that you understand, agree to and accept

this "Small Print!" statement.  If you do not, you can receive

a refund of the money (if any) you paid for this etext by

sending a request within 30 days of receiving it to the person

you got it from.  If you received this etext on a physical

medium (such as a disk), you must return it with your request.



ABOUT PROJECT GUTENBERG-TM ETEXTS

This PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm etext, like most PROJECT GUTENBERG-

tm etexts, is a "public domain" work distributed by Professor

Michael S. Hart through the Project Gutenberg Association at

Carnegie-Mellon University (the "Project").  Among other

things, this means that no one owns a United States copyright

on or for this work, so the Project (and you!) can copy and

distribute it in the United States without permission and

without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules, set forth

below, apply if you wish to copy and distribute this etext

under the Project's "PROJECT GUTENBERG" trademark.



To create these etexts, the Project expends considerable

efforts to identify, transcribe and proofread public domain

works.  Despite these efforts, the Project's etexts and any

medium they may be on may contain "Defects".  Among other

things, Defects may take the form of incomplete, inaccurate or

corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other

intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged

disk or other etext medium, a computer virus, or computer

codes that damage or cannot be read by your equipment.



LIMITED WARRANTY; DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES

But for the "Right of Replacement or Refund" described below,

[1] the Project (and any other party you may receive this

etext from as a PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm etext) disclaims all

liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including

legal fees, and [2] YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE OR

UNDER STRICT LIABILITY, OR FOR BREACH OF WARRANTY OR CONTRACT,

INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE

OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES, EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE

POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES.



If you discover a Defect in this etext within 90 days of

receiving it, you can receive a refund of the money (if any)

you paid for it by sending an explanatory note within that

time to the person you received it from.  If you received it

on a physical medium, you must return it with your note, and

such person may choose to alternatively give you a replacement

copy.  If you received it electronically, such person may

choose to alternatively give you a second opportunity to

receive it electronically.



THIS ETEXT IS OTHERWISE PROVIDED TO YOU "AS-IS".  NO OTHER

WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, ARE MADE TO YOU AS

TO THE ETEXT OR ANY MEDIUM IT MAY BE ON, INCLUDING BUT NOT

LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A

PARTICULAR PURPOSE.



Some states do not allow disclaimers of implied warranties or

the exclusion or limitation of consequential damages, so the

above disclaimers and exclusions may not apply to you, and you

may have other legal rights.



INDEMNITY

You will indemnify and hold the Project, its directors,

officers, members and agents harmless from all liability, cost

and expense, including legal fees, that arise directly or

indirectly from any of the following that you do or cause:

[1] distribution of this etext, [2] alteration, modification,

or addition to the etext, or [3] any Defect.



DISTRIBUTION UNDER "PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm"

You may distribute copies of this etext electronically, or by

disk, book or any other medium if you either delete this

"Small Print!" and all other references to Project Gutenberg,

or:



[1]  Only give exact copies of it.  Among other things, this

     requires that you do not remove, alter or modify the

     etext or this "small print!" statement.  You may however,

     if you wish, distribute this etext in machine readable

     binary, compressed, mark-up, or proprietary form,

     including any form resulting from conversion by word pro-

     cessing or hypertext software, but only so long as

     *EITHER*:



     [*]  The etext, when displayed, is clearly readable, and

          does *not* contain characters other than those

          intended by the author of the work, although tilde

          (~), asterisk (*) and underline (_) characters may

          be used to convey punctuation intended by the

          author, and additional characters may be used to

          indicate hypertext links; OR



     [*]  The etext may be readily converted by the reader at

          no expense into plain ASCII, EBCDIC or equivalent

          form by the program that displays the etext (as is

          the case, for instance, with most word processors);

          OR



     [*]  You provide, or agree to also provide on request at

          no additional cost, fee or expense, a copy of the

          etext in its original plain ASCII form (or in EBCDIC

          or other equivalent proprietary form).



[2]  Honor the etext refund and replacement provisions of this

     "Small Print!" statement.



[3]  Pay a trademark license fee to the Project of 20% of the

     net profits you derive calculated using the method you

     already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  If you

     don't derive profits, no royalty is due.  Royalties are

     payable to "Project Gutenberg Association/Carnegie-Mellon

     University" within the 60 days following each

     date you prepare (or were legally required to prepare)

     your annual (or equivalent periodic) tax return.



WHAT IF YOU *WANT* TO SEND MONEY EVEN IF YOU DON'T HAVE TO?

The Project gratefully accepts contributions in money, time,

scanning machines, OCR software, public domain etexts, royalty

free copyright licenses, and every other sort of contribution

you can think of.  Money should be paid to "Project Gutenberg

Association / Carnegie-Mellon University".



We are planning on making some changes in our donation structure

in 2000, so you might want to email me, hart@pobox.com beforehand.









*END THE SMALL PRINT! FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN ETEXTS*Ver.04.29.93*END*











Etext prepared by John Bickers, jbickers@ihug.co.nz

and Dagny, dagnyj@hotmail.com











CRIME AND PUNISHMENT



by FYODOR DOSTOEVSKY







Translated By

Constance Garnett







TRANSLATOR'S PREFACE



A few words about Dostoevsky himself may help the English reader to

understand his work.



Dostoevsky was the son of a doctor. His parents were very hard-

working and deeply religious people, but so poor that they lived with

their five children in only two rooms. The father and mother spent

their evenings in reading aloud to their children, generally from

books of a serious character.



Though always sickly and delicate Dostoevsky came out third in the

final examination of the Petersburg school of Engineering. There he

had already begun his first work, "Poor Folk."



This story was published by the poet Nekrassov in his review and was

received with acclamations. The shy, unknown youth found himself

instantly something of a celebrity. A brilliant and successful career

seemed to open before him, but those hopes were soon dashed. In 1849

he was arrested.



Though neither by temperament nor conviction a revolutionist,

Dostoevsky was one of a little group of young men who met together to

read Fourier and Proudhon. He was accused of "taking part in

conversations against the censorship, of reading a letter from

Byelinsky to Gogol, and of knowing of the intention to set up a

printing press." Under Nicholas I. (that "stern and just man," as

Maurice Baring calls him) this was enough, and he was condemned to

death. After eight months' imprisonment he was with twenty-one others

taken out to the Semyonovsky Square to be shot. Writing to his brother

Mihail, Dostoevsky says: "They snapped words over our heads, and they

made us put on the white shirts worn by persons condemned to death.

Thereupon we were bound in threes to stakes, to suffer execution.

Being the third in the row, I concluded I had only a few minutes of

life before me. I thought of you and your dear ones and I contrived to

kiss Plestcheiev and Dourov, who were next to me, and to bid them

farewell. Suddenly the troops beat a tattoo, we were unbound, brought

back upon the scaffold, and informed that his Majesty had spared us

our lives." The sentence was commuted to hard labour.



One of the prisoners, Grigoryev, went mad as soon as he was untied,

and never regained his sanity.



The intense suffering of this experience left a lasting stamp on

Dostoevsky's mind. Though his religious temper led him in the end to

accept every suffering with resignation and to regard it as a blessing

in his own case, he constantly recurs to the subject in his writings.

He describes the awful agony of the condemned man and insists on the

cruelty of inflicting such torture. Then followed four years of penal

servitude, spent in the company of common criminals in Siberia, where

he began the "Dead House," and some years of service in a disciplinary

battalion.



He had shown signs of some obscure nervous disease before his arrest

and this now developed into violent attacks of epilepsy, from which he

suffered for the rest of his life. The fits occurred three or four

times a year and were more frequent in periods of great strain. In

1859 he was allowed to return to Russia. He started a journal--

"Vremya," which was forbidden by the Censorship through a

misunderstanding. In 1864 he lost his first wife and his brother

Mihail. He was in terrible poverty, yet he took upon himself the

payment of his brother's debts. He started another journal--"The

Epoch," which within a few months was also prohibited. He was

weighed down by debt, his brother's family was dependent on him, he

was forced to write at heart-breaking speed, and is said never to have

corrected his work. The later years of his life were much softened by

the tenderness and devotion of his second wife.



In June 1880 he made his famous speech at the unveiling of the

monument to Pushkin in Moscow and he was received with extraordinary

demonstrations of love and honour.



A few months later Dostoevsky died. He was followed to the grave by a

vast multitude of mourners, who "gave the hapless man the funeral of a

king." He is still probably the most widely read writer in Russia.



In the words of a Russian critic, who seeks to explain the feeling

inspired by Dostoevsky: "He was one of ourselves, a man of our blood

and our bone, but one who has suffered and has seen so much more

deeply than we have his insight impresses us as wisdom . . . that

wisdom of the heart which we seek that we may learn from it how to

live. All his other gifts came to him from nature, this he won for

himself and through it he became great."











CRIME AND PUNISHMENT









PART I







CHAPTER I



On an exceptionally hot evening early in July a young man came out of

the garret in which he lodged in S. Place and walked slowly, as though

in hesitation, towards K. bridge.



He had successfully avoided meeting his landlady on the staircase. His

garret was under the roof of a high, five-storied house and was more

like a cupboard than a room. The landlady who provided him with

garret, dinners, and attendance, lived on the floor below, and every

time he went out he was obliged to pass her kitchen, the door of which

invariably stood open. And each time he passed, the young man had a

sick, frightened feeling, which made him scowl and feel ashamed. He

was hopelessly in debt to his landlady, and was afraid of meeting her.



This was not because he was cowardly and abject, quite the contrary;

but for some time past he had been in an overstrained irritable

condition, verging on hypochondria. He had become so completely

absorbed in himself, and isolated from his fellows that he dreaded

meeting, not only his landlady, but anyone at all. He was crushed by

poverty, but the anxieties of his position had of late ceased to weigh

upon him. He had given up attending to matters of practical

importance; he had lost all desire to do so. Nothing that any landlady

could do had a real terror for him. But to be stopped on the stairs,

to be forced to listen to her trivial, irrelevant gossip, to pestering

demands for payment, threats and complaints, and to rack his brains

for excuses, to prevaricate, to lie--no, rather than that, he would

creep down the stairs like a cat and slip out unseen.



This evening, however, on coming out into the street, he became

acutely aware of his fears.



"I want to attempt a thing /like that/ and am frightened by these

trifles," he thought, with an odd smile. "Hm . . . yes, all is in a

man's hands and he lets it all slip from cowardice, that's an axiom.

It would be interesting to know what it is men are most afraid of.

Taking a new step, uttering a new word is what they fear most. . . .

But I am talking too much. It's because I chatter that I do nothing.

Or perhaps it is that I chatter because I do nothing. I've learned to

chatter this last month, lying for days together in my den thinking

. . . of Jack the Giant-killer. Why am I going there now? Am I capable

of /that/? Is /that/ serious? It is not serious at all. It's simply a

fantasy to amuse myself; a plaything! Yes, maybe it is a plaything."



The heat in the street was terrible: and the airlessness, the bustle

and the plaster, scaffolding, bricks, and dust all about him, and that

special Petersburg stench, so familiar to all who are unable to get

out of town in summer--all worked painfully upon the young man's

already overwrought nerves. The insufferable stench from the pot-

houses, which are particularly numerous in that part of the town, and

the drunken men whom he met continually, although it was a working

day, completed the revolting misery of the picture. An expression of

the profoundest disgust gleamed for a moment in the young man's

refined face. He was, by the way, exceptionally handsome, above the

average in height, slim, well-built, with beautiful dark eyes and dark

brown hair. Soon he sank into deep thought, or more accurately

speaking into a complete blankness of mind; he walked along not

observing what was about him and not caring to observe it. From time

to time, he would mutter something, from the habit of talking to

himself, to which he had just confessed. At these moments he would

become conscious that his ideas were sometimes in a tangle and that he

was very weak; for two days he had scarcely tasted food.



He was so badly dressed that even a man accustomed to shabbiness would

have been ashamed to be seen in the street in such rags. In that

quarter of the town, however, scarcely any shortcoming in dress would

have created surprise. Owing to the proximity of the Hay Market, the

number of establishments of bad character, the preponderance of the

trading and working class population crowded in these streets and

alleys in the heart of Petersburg, types so various were to be seen in

the streets that no figure, however queer, would have caused surprise.

But there was such accumulated bitterness and contempt in the young

man's heart, that, in spite of all the fastidiousness of youth, he

minded his rags least of all in the street. It was a different matter

when he met with acquaintances or with former fellow students, whom,

indeed, he disliked meeting at any time. And yet when a drunken man

who, for some unknown reason, was being taken somewhere in a huge

waggon dragged by a heavy dray horse, suddenly shouted at him as he

drove past: "Hey there, German hatter" bawling at the top of his voice

and pointing at him--the young man stopped suddenly and clutched

tremulously at his hat. It was a tall round hat from Zimmerman's, but

completely worn out, rusty with age, all torn and bespattered,

brimless and bent on one side in a most unseemly fashion. Not shame,

however, but quite another feeling akin to terror had overtaken him.



"I knew it," he muttered in confusion, "I thought so! That's the worst

of all! Why, a stupid thing like this, the most trivial detail might

spoil the whole plan. Yes, my hat is too noticeable. . . . It looks

absurd and that makes it noticeable. . . . With my rags I ought to

wear a cap, any sort of old pancake, but not this grotesque thing.

Nobody wears such a hat, it would be noticed a mile off, it would be

remembered. . . . What matters is that people would remember it, and

that would give them a clue. For this business one should be as little

conspicuous as possible. . . . Trifles, trifles are what matter! Why,

it's just such trifles that always ruin everything. . . ."



He had not far to go; he knew indeed how many steps it was from the

gate of his lodging house: exactly seven hundred and thirty. He had

counted them once when he had been lost in dreams. At the time he had

put no faith in those dreams and was only tantalising himself by their

hideous but daring recklessness. Now, a month later, he had begun to

look upon them differently, and, in spite of the monologues in which

he jeered at his own impotence and indecision, he had involuntarily

come to regard this "hideous" dream as an exploit to be attempted,

although he still did not realise this himself. He was positively

going now for a "rehearsal" of his project, and at every step his

excitement grew more and more violent.



With a sinking heart and a nervous tremor, he went up to a huge house

which on one side looked on to the canal, and on the other into the

street. This house was let out in tiny tenements and was inhabited by

working people of all kinds--tailors, locksmiths, cooks, Germans of

sorts, girls picking up a living as best they could, petty clerks,

etc. There was a continual coming and going through the two gates and

in the two courtyards of the house. Three or four door-keepers were

employed on the building. The young man was very glad to meet none of

them, and at once slipped unnoticed through the door on the right, and

up the staircase. It was a back staircase, dark and narrow, but he was

familiar with it already, and knew his way, and he liked all these

surroundings: in such darkness even the most inquisitive eyes were not

to be dreaded.



"If I am so scared now, what would it be if it somehow came to pass

that I were really going to do it?" he could not help asking himself

as he reached the fourth storey. There his progress was barred by some

porters who were engaged in moving furniture out of a flat. He knew

that the flat had been occupied by a German clerk in the civil

service, and his family. This German was moving out then, and so the

fourth floor on this staircase would be untenanted except by the old

woman. "That's a good thing anyway," he thought to himself, as he rang

the bell of the old woman's flat. The bell gave a faint tinkle as

though it were made of tin and not of copper. The little flats in such

houses always have bells that ring like that. He had forgotten the

note of that bell, and now its peculiar tinkle seemed to remind him of

something and to bring it clearly before him. . . . He started, his

nerves were terribly overstrained by now. In a little while, the door

was opened a tiny crack: the old woman eyed her visitor with evident

distrust through the crack, and nothing could be seen but her little

eyes, glittering in the darkness. But, seeing a number of people on

the landing, she grew bolder, and opened the door wide. The young man

stepped into the dark entry, which was partitioned off from the tiny

kitchen. The old woman stood facing him in silence and looking

inquiringly at him. She was a diminutive, withered up old woman of

sixty, with sharp malignant eyes and a sharp little nose. Her

colourless, somewhat grizzled hair was thickly smeared with oil, and

she wore no kerchief over it. Round her thin long neck, which looked

like a hen's leg, was knotted some sort of flannel rag, and, in spite

of the heat, there hung flapping on her shoulders, a mangy fur cape,

yellow with age. The old woman coughed and groaned at every instant.

The young man must have looked at her with a rather peculiar

expression, for a gleam of mistrust came into her eyes again.



"Raskolnikov, a student, I came here a month ago," the young man made

haste to mutter, with a half bow, remembering that he ought to be more

polite.



"I remember, my good sir, I remember quite well your coming here," the

old woman said distinctly, still keeping her inquiring eyes on his

face.



"And here . . . I am again on the same errand," Raskolnikov continued,

a little disconcerted and surprised at the old woman's mistrust.

"Perhaps she is always like that though, only I did not notice it the

other time," he thought with an uneasy feeling.



The old woman paused, as though hesitating; then stepped on one side,

and pointing to the door of the room, she said, letting her visitor

pass in front of her:



"Step in, my good sir."



The little room into which the young man walked, with yellow paper on

the walls, geraniums and muslin curtains in the windows, was brightly

lighted up at that moment by the setting sun.



"So the sun will shine like this /then/ too!" flashed as it were by

chance through Raskolnikov's mind, and with a rapid glance he scanned

everything in the room, trying as far as possible to notice and

remember its arrangement. But there was nothing special in the room.

The furniture, all very old and of yellow wood, consisted of a sofa

with a huge bent wooden back, an oval table in front of the sofa, a

dressing-table with a looking-glass fixed on it between the windows,

chairs along the walls and two or three half-penny prints in yellow

frames, representing German damsels with birds in their hands--that

was all. In the corner a light was burning before a small ikon.

Everything was very clean; the floor and the furniture were brightly

polished; everything shone.



"Lizaveta's work," thought the young man. There was not a speck of

dust to be seen in the whole flat.



"It's in the houses of spiteful old widows that one finds such

cleanliness," Raskolnikov thought again, and he stole a curious glance

at the cotton curtain over the door leading into another tiny room, in

which stood the old woman's bed and chest of drawers and into which he

had never looked before. These two rooms made up the whole flat.



"What do you want?" the old woman said severely, coming into the room

and, as before, standing in front of him so as to look him straight in

the face.



"I've brought something to pawn here," and he drew out of his pocket

an old-fashioned flat silver watch, on the back of which was engraved

a globe; the chain was of steel.



"But the time is up for your last pledge. The month was up the day

before yesterday."



"I will bring you the interest for another month; wait a little."



"But that's for me to do as I please, my good sir, to wait or to sell

your pledge at once."



"How much will you give me for the watch, Alyona Ivanovna?"



"You come with such trifles, my good sir, it's scarcely worth

anything. I gave you two roubles last time for your ring and one could

buy it quite new at a jeweler's for a rouble and a half."



"Give me four roubles for it, I shall redeem it, it was my father's. I

shall be getting some money soon."



"A rouble and a half, and interest in advance, if you like!"



"A rouble and a half!" cried the young man.



"Please yourself"--and the old woman handed him back the watch. The

young man took it, and was so angry that he was on the point of going

away; but checked himself at once, remembering that there was nowhere

else he could go, and that he had had another object also in coming.



"Hand it over," he said roughly.



The old woman fumbled in her pocket for her keys, and disappeared

behind the curtain into the other room. The young man, left standing

alone in the middle of the room, listened inquisitively, thinking. He

could hear her unlocking the chest of drawers.



"It must be the top drawer," he reflected. "So she carries the keys in

a pocket on the right. All in one bunch on a steel ring. . . . And

there's one key there, three times as big as all the others, with deep

notches; that can't be the key of the chest of drawers . . . then

there must be some other chest or strong-box . . . that's worth

knowing. Strong-boxes always have keys like that . . . but how

degrading it all is."



The old woman came back.



"Here, sir: as we say ten copecks the rouble a month, so I must take

fifteen copecks from a rouble and a half for the month in advance. But

for the two roubles I lent you before, you owe me now twenty copecks

on the same reckoning in advance. That makes thirty-five copecks

altogether. So I must give you a rouble and fifteen copecks for the

watch. Here it is."



"What! only a rouble and fifteen copecks now!"



"Just so."



The young man did not dispute it and took the money. He looked at the

old woman, and was in no hurry to get away, as though there was still

something he wanted to say or to do, but he did not himself quite know

what.



"I may be bringing you something else in a day or two, Alyona Ivanovna

--a valuable thing--silver--a cigarette-box, as soon as I get it back

from a friend . . ." he broke off in confusion.



"Well, we will talk about it then, sir."



"Good-bye--are you always at home alone, your sister is not here with

you?" He asked her as casually as possible as he went out into the

passage.



"What business is she of yours, my good sir?"



"Oh, nothing particular, I simply asked. You are too quick. . . .

Good-day, Alyona Ivanovna."



Raskolnikov went out in complete confusion. This confusion became more

and more intense. As he went down the stairs, he even stopped short,

two or three times, as though suddenly struck by some thought. When he

was in the street he cried out, "Oh, God, how loathsome it all is! and

can I, can I possibly. . . . No, it's nonsense, it's rubbish!" he

added resolutely. "And how could such an atrocious thing come into my

head? What filthy things my heart is capable of. Yes, filthy above

all, disgusting, loathsome, loathsome!--and for a whole month I've

been. . . ." But no words, no exclamations, could express his

agitation. The feeling of intense repulsion, which had begun to

oppress and torture his heart while he was on his way to the old

woman, had by now reached such a pitch and had taken such a definite

form that he did not know what to do with himself to escape from his

wretchedness. He walked along the pavement like a drunken man,

regardless of the passers-by, and jostling against them, and only came

to his senses when he was in the next street. Looking round, he

noticed that he was standing close to a tavern which was entered by

steps leading from the pavement to the basement. At that instant two

drunken men came out at the door, and abusing and supporting one

another, they mounted the steps. Without stopping to think,

Raskolnikov went down the steps at once. Till that moment he had never

been into a tavern, but now he felt giddy and was tormented by a

burning thirst. He longed for a drink of cold beer, and attributed his

sudden weakness to the want of food. He sat down at a sticky little

table in a dark and dirty corner; ordered some beer, and eagerly drank

off the first glassful. At once he felt easier; and his thoughts

became clear.



"All that's nonsense," he said hopefully, "and there is nothing in it

all to worry about! It's simply physical derangement. Just a glass of

beer, a piece of dry bread--and in one moment the brain is stronger,

the mind is clearer and the will is firm! Phew, how utterly petty it

all is!"



But in spite of this scornful reflection, he was by now looking

cheerful as though he were suddenly set free from a terrible burden:

and he gazed round in a friendly way at the people in the room. But

even at that moment he had a dim foreboding that this happier frame of

mind was also not normal.



There were few people at the time in the tavern. Besides the two

drunken men he had met on the steps, a group consisting of about five

men and a girl with a concertina had gone out at the same time. Their

departure left the room quiet and rather empty. The persons still in

the tavern were a man who appeared to be an artisan, drunk, but not

extremely so, sitting before a pot of beer, and his companion, a huge,

stout man with a grey beard, in a short full-skirted coat. He was very

drunk: and had dropped asleep on the bench; every now and then, he

began as though in his sleep, cracking his fingers, with his arms wide

apart and the upper part of his body bounding about on the bench,

while he hummed some meaningless refrain, trying to recall some such

lines as these:



 "His wife a year he fondly loved

  His wife a--a year he--fondly loved."



Or suddenly waking up again:



 "Walking along the crowded row

  He met the one he used to know."



But no one shared his enjoyment: his silent companion looked with

positive hostility and mistrust at all these manifestations. There was

another man in the room who looked somewhat like a retired government

clerk. He was sitting apart, now and then sipping from his pot and

looking round at the company. He, too, appeared to be in some

agitation.







CHAPTER II



Raskolnikov was not used to crowds, and, as we said before, he avoided

society of every sort, more especially of late. But now all at once he

felt a desire to be with other people. Something new seemed to be

taking place within him, and with it he felt a sort of thirst for

company. He was so weary after a whole month of concentrated

wretchedness and gloomy excitement that he longed to rest, if only for

a moment, in some other world, whatever it might be; and, in spite of

the filthiness of the surroundings, he was glad now to stay in the

tavern.



The master of the establishment was in another room, but he frequently

came down some steps into the main room, his jaunty, tarred boots with

red turn-over tops coming into view each time before the rest of his

person. He wore a full coat and a horribly greasy black satin

waistcoat, with no cravat, and his whole face seemed smeared with oil

like an iron lock. At the counter stood a boy of about fourteen, and

there was another boy somewhat younger who handed whatever was wanted.

On the counter lay some sliced cucumber, some pieces of dried black

bread, and some fish, chopped up small, all smelling very bad. It was

insufferably close, and so heavy with the fumes of spirits that five

minutes in such an atmosphere might well make a man drunk.



There are chance meetings with strangers that interest us from the

first moment, before a word is spoken. Such was the impression made on

Raskolnikov by the person sitting a little distance from him, who

looked like a retired clerk. The young man often recalled this

impression afterwards, and even ascribed it to presentiment. He looked

repeatedly at the clerk, partly no doubt because the latter was

staring persistently at him, obviously anxious to enter into

conversation. At the other persons in the room, including the tavern-

keeper, the clerk looked as though he were used to their company, and

weary of it, showing a shade of condescending contempt for them as

persons of station and culture inferior to his own, with whom it would

be useless for him to converse. He was a man over fifty, bald and

grizzled, of medium height, and stoutly built. His face, bloated from

continual drinking, was of a yellow, even greenish, tinge, with

swollen eyelids out of which keen reddish eyes gleamed like little

chinks. But there was something very strange in him; there was a light

in his eyes as though of intense feeling--perhaps there were even

thought and intelligence, but at the same time there was a gleam of

something like madness. He was wearing an old and hopelessly ragged

black dress coat, with all its buttons missing except one, and that

one he had buttoned, evidently clinging to this last trace of

respectability. A crumpled shirt front, covered with spots and stains,

protruded from his canvas waistcoat. Like a clerk, he wore no beard,

nor moustache, but had been so long unshaven that his chin looked like

a stiff greyish brush. And there was something respectable and like an

official about his manner too. But he was restless; he ruffled up his

hair and from time to time let his head drop into his hands dejectedly

resting his ragged elbows on the stained and sticky table. At last he

looked straight at Raskolnikov, and said loudly and resolutely:



"May I venture, honoured sir, to engage you in polite conversation?

Forasmuch as, though your exterior would not command respect, my

experience admonishes me that you are a man of education and not

accustomed to drinking. I have always respected education when in

conjunction with genuine sentiments, and I am besides a titular

counsellor in rank. Marmeladov--such is my name; titular counsellor. I

make bold to inquire--have you been in the service?"



"No, I am studying," answered the young man, somewhat surprised at the

grandiloquent style of the speaker and also at being so directly

addressed. In spite of the momentary desire he had just been feeling

for company of any sort, on being actually spoken to he felt

immediately his habitual irritable and uneasy aversion for any

stranger who approached or attempted to approach him.



"A student then, or formerly a student," cried the clerk. "Just what I

thought! I'm a man of experience, immense experience, sir," and he

tapped his forehead with his fingers in self-approval. "You've been a

student or have attended some learned institution! . . . But allow me.

. . ." He got up, staggered, took up his jug and glass, and sat down

beside the young man, facing him a little sideways. He was drunk, but

spoke fluently and boldly, only occasionally losing the thread of his

sentences and drawling his words. He pounced upon Raskolnikov as

greedily as though he too had not spoken to a soul for a month.



"Honoured sir," he began almost with solemnity, "poverty is not a

vice, that's a true saying. Yet I know too that drunkenness is not a

virtue, and that that's even truer. But beggary, honoured sir, beggary

is a vice. In poverty you may still retain your innate nobility of

soul, but in beggary--never--no one. For beggary a man is not chased

out of human society with a stick, he is swept out with a broom, so as

to make it as humiliating as possible; and quite right, too, forasmuch

as in beggary I am ready to be the first to humiliate myself. Hence

the pot-house! Honoured sir, a month ago Mr. Lebeziatnikov gave my

wife a beating, and my wife is a very different matter from me! Do you

understand? Allow me to ask you another question out of simple

curiosity: have you ever spent a night on a hay barge, on the Neva?"



"No, I have not happened to," answered Raskolnikov. "What do you

mean?"



"Well, I've just come from one and it's the fifth night I've slept

so. . . ." He filled his glass, emptied it and paused. Bits of hay

were in fact clinging to his clothes and sticking to his hair. It

seemed quite probable that he had not undressed or washed for the last

five days. His hands, particularly, were filthy. They were fat and

red, with black nails.



His conversation seemed to excite a general though languid interest.

The boys at the counter fell to sniggering. The innkeeper came down

from the upper room, apparently on purpose to listen to the "funny

fellow" and sat down at a little distance, yawning lazily, but with

dignity. Evidently Marmeladov was a familiar figure here, and he had

most likely acquired his weakness for high-flown speeches from the

habit of frequently entering into conversation with strangers of all

sorts in the tavern. This habit develops into a necessity in some

drunkards, and especially in those who are looked after sharply and

kept in order at home. Hence in the company of other drinkers they try

to justify themselves and even if possible obtain consideration.



"Funny fellow!" pronounced the innkeeper. "And why don't you work, why

aren't you at your duty, if you are in the service?"



"Why am I not at my duty, honoured sir," Marmeladov went on,

addressing himself exclusively to Raskolnikov, as though it had been

he who put that question to him. "Why am I not at my duty? Does not my

heart ache to think what a useless worm I am? A month ago when Mr.

Lebeziatnikov beat my wife with his own hands, and I lay drunk, didn't

I suffer? Excuse me, young man, has it ever happened to you . . . hm

. . . well, to petition hopelessly for a loan?"



"Yes, it has. But what do you mean by hopelessly?"



"Hopelessly in the fullest sense, when you know beforehand that you

will get nothing by it. You know, for instance, beforehand with

positive certainty that this man, this most reputable and exemplary

citizen, will on no consideration give you money; and indeed I ask you

why should he? For he knows of course that I shan't pay it back. From

compassion? But Mr. Lebeziatnikov who keeps up with modern ideas

explained the other day that compassion is forbidden nowadays by

science itself, and that that's what is done now in England, where

there is political economy. Why, I ask you, should he give it to me?

And yet though I know beforehand that he won't, I set off to him

and . . ."



"Why do you go?" put in Raskolnikov.



"Well, when one has no one, nowhere else one can go! For every man

must have somewhere to go. Since there are times when one absolutely

must go somewhere! When my own daughter first went out with a yellow

ticket, then I had to go . . . (for my daughter has a yellow

passport)," he added in parenthesis, looking with a certain uneasiness

at the young man. "No matter, sir, no matter!" he went on hurriedly

and with apparent composure when both the boys at the counter guffawed

and even the innkeeper smiled--"No matter, I am not confounded by the

wagging of their heads; for everyone knows everything about it

already, and all that is secret is made open. And I accept it all, not

with contempt, but with humility. So be it! So be it! 'Behold the

man!' Excuse me, young man, can you. . . . No, to put it more strongly

and more distinctly; not /can/ you but /dare/ you, looking upon me,

assert that I am not a pig?"



The young man did not answer a word.



"Well," the orator began again stolidly and with even increased

dignity, after waiting for the laughter in the room to subside. "Well,

so be it, I am a pig, but she is a lady! I have the semblance of a

beast, but Katerina Ivanovna, my spouse, is a person of education and

an officer's daughter. Granted, granted, I am a scoundrel, but she is

a woman of a noble heart, full of sentiments, refined by education.

And yet . . . oh, if only she felt for me! Honoured sir, honoured sir,

you know every man ought to have at least one place where people feel

for him! But Katerina Ivanovna, though she is magnanimous, she is

unjust. . . . And yet, although I realise that when she pulls my hair

she only does it out of pity--for I repeat without being ashamed, she

pulls my hair, young man," he declared with redoubled dignity, hearing

the sniggering again--"but, my God, if she would but once. . . . But

no, no! It's all in vain and it's no use talking! No use talking! For

more than once, my wish did come true and more than once she has felt

for me but . . . such is my fate and I am a beast by nature!"



"Rather!" assented the innkeeper yawning. Marmeladov struck his fist

resolutely on the table.



"Such is my fate! Do you know, sir, do you know, I have sold her very

stockings for drink? Not her shoes--that would be more or less in the

order of things, but her stockings, her stockings I have sold for

drink! Her mohair shawl I sold for drink, a present to her long ago,

her own property, not mine; and we live in a cold room and she caught

cold this winter and has begun coughing and spitting blood too. We

have three little children and Katerina Ivanovna is at work from

morning till night; she is scrubbing and cleaning and washing the

children, for she's been used to cleanliness from a child. But her

chest is weak and she has a tendency to consumption and I feel it! Do

you suppose I don't feel it? And the more I drink the more I feel it.

That's why I drink too. I try to find sympathy and feeling in drink.

. . . I drink so that I may suffer twice as much!" And as though in

despair he laid his head down on the table.



"Young man," he went on, raising his head again, "in your face I seem

to read some trouble of mind. When you came in I read it, and that was

why I addressed you at once. For in unfolding to you the story of my

life, I do not wish to make myself a laughing-stock before these idle

listeners, who indeed know all about it already, but I am looking for

a man of feeling and education. Know then that my wife was educated in

a high-class school for the daughters of noblemen, and on leaving she

danced the shawl dance before the governor and other personages for

which she was presented with a gold medal and a certificate of merit.

The medal . . . well, the medal of course was sold--long ago, hm . . .

but the certificate of merit is in her trunk still and not long ago

she showed it to our landlady. And although she is most continually on

bad terms with the landlady, yet she wanted to tell someone or other

of her past honours and of the happy days that are gone. I don't

condemn her for it, I don't blame her, for the one thing left her is

recollection of the past, and all the rest is dust and ashes. Yes,

yes, she is a lady of spirit, proud and determined. She scrubs the

floors herself and has nothing but black bread to eat, but won't allow

herself to be treated with disrespect. That's why she would not

overlook Mr. Lebeziatnikov's rudeness to her, and so when he gave her

a beating for it, she took to her bed more from the hurt to her

feelings than from the blows. She was a widow when I married her, with

three children, one smaller than the other. She married her first

husband, an infantry officer, for love, and ran away with him from her

father's house. She was exceedingly fond of her husband; but he gave

way to cards, got into trouble and with that he died. He used to beat

her at the end: and although she paid him back, of which I have

authentic documentary evidence, to this day she speaks of him with

tears and she throws him up to me; and I am glad, I am glad that,

though only in imagination, she should think of herself as having once

been happy. . . . And she was left at his death with three children in

a wild and remote district where I happened to be at the time; and she

was left in such hopeless poverty that, although I have seen many ups

and downs of all sort, I don't feel equal to describing it even. Her

relations had all thrown her off. And she was proud, too, excessively

proud. . . . And then, honoured sir, and then, I, being at the time a

widower, with a daughter of fourteen left me by my first wife, offered

her my hand, for I could not bear the sight of such suffering. You can

judge the extremity of her calamities, that she, a woman of education

and culture and distinguished family, should have consented to be my

wife. But she did! Weeping and sobbing and wringing her hands, she

married me! For she had nowhere to turn! Do you understand, sir, do

you understand what it means when you have absolutely nowhere to turn?

No, that you don't understand yet. . . . And for a whole year, I

performed my duties conscientiously and faithfully, and did not touch

this" (he tapped the jug with his finger), "for I have feelings. But

even so, I could not please her; and then I lost my place too, and

that through no fault of mine but through changes in the office; and

then I did touch it! . . . It will be a year and a half ago soon since

we found ourselves at last after many wanderings and numerous

calamities in this magnificent capital, adorned with innumerable

monuments. Here I obtained a situation. . . . I obtained it and I lost

it again. Do you understand? This time it was through my own fault I

lost it: for my weakness had come out. . . . We have now part of a

room at Amalia Fyodorovna Lippevechsel's; and what we live upon and

what we pay our rent with, I could not say. There are a lot of people

living there besides ourselves. Dirt and disorder, a perfect Bedlam

. . . hm . . . yes . . . And meanwhile my daughter by my first wife

has grown up; and what my daughter has had to put up with from her

step-mother whilst she was growing up, I won't speak of. For, though

Katerina Ivanovna is full of generous feelings, she is a spirited

lady, irritable and short--tempered. . . . Yes. But it's no use going

over that! Sonia, as you may well fancy, has had no education. I did

make an effort four years ago to give her a course of geography and

universal history, but as I was not very well up in those subjects

myself and we had no suitable books, and what books we had . . . hm,

anyway we have not even those now, so all our instruction came to an

end. We stopped at Cyrus of Persia. Since she has attained years of

maturity, she has read other books of romantic tendency and of late

she had read with great interest a book she got through Mr.

Lebeziatnikov, Lewes' Physiology--do you know it?--and even recounted

extracts from it to us: and that's the whole of her education. And now

may I venture to address you, honoured sir, on my own account with a

private question. Do you suppose that a respectable poor girl can earn

much by honest work? Not fifteen farthings a day can she earn, if she

is respectable and has no special talent and that without putting her

work down for an instant! And what's more, Ivan Ivanitch Klopstock the

civil counsellor--have you heard of him?--has not to this day paid her

for the half-dozen linen shirts she made him and drove her roughly

away, stamping and reviling her, on the pretext that the shirt collars

were not made like the pattern and were put in askew. And there are

the little ones hungry. . . . And Katerina Ivanovna walking up and

down and wringing her hands, her cheeks flushed red, as they always

are in that disease: 'Here you live with us,' says she, 'you eat and

drink and are kept warm and you do nothing to help.' And much she gets

to eat and drink when there is not a crust for the little ones for

three days! I was lying at the time . . . well, what of it! I was

lying drunk and I heard my Sonia speaking (she is a gentle creature

with a soft little voice . . . fair hair and such a pale, thin little

face). She said: 'Katerina Ivanovna, am I really to do a thing like

that?' And Darya Frantsovna, a woman of evil character and very well

known to the police, had two or three times tried to get at her

through the landlady. 'And why not?' said Katerina Ivanovna with a

jeer, 'you are something mighty precious to be so careful of!' But

don't blame her, don't blame her, honoured sir, don't blame her! She

was not herself when she spoke, but driven to distraction by her

illness and the crying of the hungry children; and it was said more to

wound her than anything else. . . . For that's Katerina Ivanovna's

character, and when children cry, even from hunger, she falls to

beating them at once. At six o'clock I saw Sonia get up, put on her

kerchief and her cape, and go out of the room and about nine o'clock

she came back. She walked straight up to Katerina Ivanovna and she

laid thirty roubles on the table before her in silence. She did not

utter a word, she did not even look at her, she simply picked up our

big green /drap de dames/ shawl (we have a shawl, made of /drap de

dames/), put it over her head and face and lay down on the bed with

her face to the wall; only her little shoulders and her body kept

shuddering. . . . And I went on lying there, just as before. . . . And

then I saw, young man, I saw Katerina Ivanovna, in the same silence go

up to Sonia's little bed; she was on her knees all the evening kissing

Sonia's feet, and would not get up, and then they both fell asleep in

each other's arms . . . together, together . . . yes . . . and I . . .

lay drunk."



Marmeladov stopped short, as though his voice had failed him. Then he

hurriedly filled his glass, drank, and cleared his throat.



"Since then, sir," he went on after a brief pause--"Since then, owing

to an unfortunate occurrence and through information given by evil-

intentioned persons--in all which Darya Frantsovna took a leading part

on the pretext that she had been treated with want of respect--since

then my daughter Sofya Semyonovna has been forced to take a yellow

ticket, and owing to that she is unable to go on living with us. For

our landlady, Amalia Fyodorovna would not hear of it (though she had

backed up Darya Frantsovna before) and Mr. Lebeziatnikov too . . . hm.

. . . All the trouble between him and Katerina Ivanovna was on Sonia's

account. At first he was for making up to Sonia himself and then all

of a sudden he stood on his dignity: 'how,' said he, 'can a highly

educated man like me live in the same rooms with a girl like that?'

And Katerina Ivanovna would not let it pass, she stood up for her

. . . and so that's how it happened. And Sonia comes to us now, mostly

after dark; she comforts Katerina Ivanovna and gives her all she can.

. . . She has a room at the Kapernaumovs' the tailors, she lodges with

them; Kapernaumov is a lame man with a cleft palate and all of his

numerous family have cleft palates too. And his wife, too, has a cleft

palate. They all live in one room, but Sonia has her own, partitioned

off. . . . Hm . . . yes . . . very poor people and all with cleft

palates . . . yes. Then I got up in the morning, and put on my rags,

lifted up my hands to heaven and set off to his excellency Ivan

Afanasyvitch. His excellency Ivan Afanasyvitch, do you know him? No?

Well, then, it's a man of God you don't know. He is wax . . . wax

before the face of the Lord; even as wax melteth! . . . His eyes were

dim when he heard my story. 'Marmeladov, once already you have

deceived my expectations . . . I'll take you once more on my own

responsibility'--that's what he said, 'remember,' he said, 'and now

you can go.' I kissed the dust at his feet--in thought only, for in

reality he would not have allowed me to do it, being a statesman and a

man of modern political and enlightened ideas. I returned home, and

when I announced that I'd been taken back into the service and should

receive a salary, heavens, what a to-do there was . . .!"



Marmeladov stopped again in violent excitement. At that moment a whole

party of revellers already drunk came in from the street, and the

sounds of a hired concertina and the cracked piping voice of a child

of seven singing "The Hamlet" were heard in the entry. The room was

filled with noise. The tavern-keeper and the boys were busy with the

new-comers. Marmeladov paying no attention to the new arrivals

continued his story. He appeared by now to be extremely weak, but as

he became more and more drunk, he became more and more talkative. The

recollection of his recent success in getting the situation seemed to

revive him, and was positively reflected in a sort of radiance on his

face. Raskolnikov listened attentively.



"That was five weeks ago, sir. Yes. . . . As soon as Katerina Ivanovna

and Sonia heard of it, mercy on us, it was as though I stepped into

the kingdom of Heaven. It used to be: you can lie like a beast,

nothing but abuse. Now they were walking on tiptoe, hushing the

children. 'Semyon Zaharovitch is tired with his work at the office, he

is resting, shh!' They made me coffee before I went to work and boiled

cream for me! They began to get real cream for me, do you hear that?

And how they managed to get together the money for a decent outfit--

eleven roubles, fifty copecks, I can't guess. Boots, cotton shirt-

fronts--most magnificent, a uniform, they got up all in splendid

style, for eleven roubles and a half. The first morning I came back

from the office I found Katerina Ivanovna had cooked two courses for

dinner--soup and salt meat with horse radish--which we had never

dreamed of till then. She had not any dresses . . . none at all, but

she got herself up as though she were going on a visit; and not that

she'd anything to do it with, she smartened herself up with nothing at

all, she'd done her hair nicely, put on a clean collar of some sort,

cuffs, and there she was, quite a different person, she was younger

and better looking. Sonia, my little darling, had only helped with

money 'for the time,' she said, 'it won't do for me to come and see

you too often. After dark maybe when no one can see.' Do you hear, do

you hear? I lay down for a nap after dinner and what do you think:

though Katerina Ivanovna had quarrelled to the last degree with our

landlady Amalia Fyodorovna only a week before, she could not resist

then asking her in to coffee. For two hours they were sitting,

whispering together. 'Semyon Zaharovitch is in the service again, now,

and receiving a salary,' says she, 'and he went himself to his

excellency and his excellency himself came out to him, made all the

others wait and led Semyon Zaharovitch by the hand before everybody

into his study.' Do you hear, do you hear? 'To be sure,' says he,

'Semyon Zaharovitch, remembering your past services,' says he, 'and in

spite of your propensity to that foolish weakness, since you promise

now and since moreover we've got on badly without you,' (do you hear,

do you hear;) 'and so,' says he, 'I rely now on your word as a

gentleman.' And all that, let me tell you, she has simply made up for

herself, and not simply out of wantonness, for the sake of bragging;

no, she believes it all herself, she amuses herself with her own

fancies, upon my word she does! And I don't blame her for it, no, I

don't blame her! . . . Six days ago when I brought her my first

earnings in full--twenty-three roubles forty copecks altogether--she

called me her poppet: 'poppet,' said she, 'my little poppet.' And when

we were by ourselves, you understand? You would not think me a beauty,

you would not think much of me as a husband, would you? . . . Well,

she pinched my cheek, 'my little poppet,' said she."



Marmeladov broke off, tried to smile, but suddenly his chin began to

twitch. He controlled himself however. The tavern, the degraded

appearance of the man, the five nights in the hay barge, and the pot

of spirits, and yet this poignant love for his wife and children

bewildered his listener. Raskolnikov listened intently but with a sick

sensation. He felt vexed that he had come here.



"Honoured sir, honoured sir," cried Marmeladov recovering himself--

"Oh, sir, perhaps all this seems a laughing matter to you, as it does

to others, and perhaps I am only worrying you with the stupidity of

all the trivial details of my home life, but it is not a laughing

matter to me. For I can feel it all. . . . And the whole of that

heavenly day of my life and the whole of that evening I passed in

fleeting dreams of how I would arrange it all, and how I would dress

all the children, and how I should give her rest, and how I should

rescue my own daughter from dishonour and restore her to the bosom of

her family. . . . And a great deal more. . . . Quite excusable, sir.

Well, then, sir" (Marmeladov suddenly gave a sort of start, raised his

head and gazed intently at his listener) "well, on the very next day

after all those dreams, that is to say, exactly five days ago, in the

evening, by a cunning trick, like a thief in the night, I stole from

Katerina Ivanovna the key of her box, took out what was left of my

earnings, how much it was I have forgotten, and now look at me, all of

you! It's the fifth day since I left home, and they are looking for me

there and it's the end of my employment, and my uniform is lying in a

tavern on the Egyptian bridge. I exchanged it for the garments I have

on . . . and it's the end of everything!"



Marmeladov struck his forehead with his fist, clenched his teeth,

closed his eyes and leaned heavily with his elbow on the table. But a

minute later his face suddenly changed and with a certain assumed

slyness and affectation of bravado, he glanced at Raskolnikov, laughed

and said:



"This morning I went to see Sonia, I went to ask her for a pick-me-up!

He-he-he!"



"You don't say she gave it to you?" cried one of the new-comers; he

shouted the words and went off into a guffaw.



"This very quart was bought with her money," Marmeladov declared,

addressing himself exclusively to Raskolnikov. "Thirty copecks she

gave me with her own hands, her last, all she had, as I saw. . . . She

said nothing, she only looked at me without a word. . . . Not on

earth, but up yonder . . . they grieve over men, they weep, but they

don't blame them, they don't blame them! But it hurts more, it hurts

more when they don't blame! Thirty copecks yes! And maybe she needs

them now, eh? What do you think, my dear sir? For now she's got to

keep up her appearance. It costs money, that smartness, that special

smartness, you know? Do you understand? And there's pomatum, too, you

see, she must have things; petticoats, starched ones, shoes, too, real

jaunty ones to show off her foot when she has to step over a puddle.

Do you understand, sir, do you understand what all that smartness

means? And here I, her own father, here I took thirty copecks of that

money for a drink! And I am drinking it! And I have already drunk it!

Come, who will have pity on a man like me, eh? Are you sorry for me,

sir, or not? Tell me, sir, are you sorry or not? He-he-he!"



He would have filled his glass, but there was no drink left. The pot

was empty.



"What are you to be pitied for?" shouted the tavern-keeper who was

again near them.



Shouts of laughter and even oaths followed. The laughter and the oaths

came from those who were listening and also from those who had heard

nothing but were simply looking at the figure of the discharged

government clerk.



"To be pitied! Why am I to be pitied?" Marmeladov suddenly declaimed,

standing up with his arm outstretched, as though he had been only

waiting for that question.



"Why am I to be pitied, you say? Yes! there's nothing to pity me for!

I ought to be crucified, crucified on a cross, not pitied! Crucify me,

oh judge, crucify me but pity me! And then I will go of myself to be

crucified, for it's not merry-making I seek but tears and tribulation!

. . . Do you suppose, you that sell, that this pint of yours has been

sweet to me? It was tribulation I sought at the bottom of it, tears

and tribulation, and have found it, and I have tasted it; but He will

pity us Who has had pity on all men, Who has understood all men and

all things, He is the One, He too is the judge. He will come in that

day and He will ask: 'Where is the daughter who gave herself for her

cross, consumptive step-mother and for the little children of another?

Where is the daughter who had pity upon the filthy drunkard, her

earthly father, undismayed by his beastliness?' And He will say, 'Come

to me! I have already forgiven thee once. . . . I have forgiven thee

once. . . . Thy sins which are many are forgiven thee for thou hast

loved much. . . .' And he will forgive my Sonia, He will forgive, I

know it . . . I felt it in my heart when I was with her just now! And

He will judge and will forgive all, the good and the evil, the wise

and the meek. . . . And when He has done with all of them, then He

will summon us. 'You too come forth,' He will say, 'Come forth ye

drunkards, come forth, ye weak ones, come forth, ye children of

shame!' And we shall all come forth, without shame and shall stand

before him. And He will say unto us, 'Ye are swine, made in the Image

of the Beast and with his mark; but come ye also!' And the wise ones

and those of understanding will say, 'Oh Lord, why dost Thou receive

these men?' And He will say, 'This is why I receive them, oh ye wise,

this is why I receive them, oh ye of understanding, that not one of

them believed himself to be worthy of this.' And He will hold out His

hands to us and we shall fall down before him . . . and we shall weep

. . . and we shall understand all things! Then we shall understand

all! . . . and all will understand, Katerina Ivanovna even . . . she

will understand. . . . Lord, Thy kingdom come!" And he sank down on

the bench exhausted, and helpless, looking at no one, apparently

oblivious of his surroundings and plunged in deep thought. His words

had created a certain impression; there was a moment of silence; but

soon laughter and oaths were heard again.



"That's his notion!"



"Talked himself silly!"



"A fine clerk he is!"



And so on, and so on.



"Let us go, sir," said Marmeladov all at once, raising his head and

addressing Raskolnikov--"come along with me . . . Kozel's house,

looking into the yard. I'm going to Katerina Ivanovna--time I did."



Raskolnikov had for some time been wanting to go and he had meant to

help him. Marmeladov was much unsteadier on his legs than in his

speech and leaned heavily on the young man. They had two or three

hundred paces to go. The drunken man was more and more overcome by

dismay and confusion as they drew nearer the house.



"It's not Katerina Ivanovna I am afraid of now," he muttered in

agitation--"and that she will begin pulling my hair. What does my hair

matter! Bother my hair! That's what I say! Indeed it will be better if

she does begin pulling it, that's not what I am afraid of . . . it's

her eyes I am afraid of . . . yes, her eyes . . . the red on her

cheeks, too, frightens me . . . and her breathing too. . . . Have you

noticed how people in that disease breathe . . . when they are

excited? I am frightened of the children's crying, too. . . . For if

Sonia has not taken them food . . . I don't know what's happened! I

don't know! But blows I am not afraid of. . . . Know, sir, that such

blows are not a pain to me, but even an enjoyment. In fact I can't get

on without it. . . . It's better so. Let her strike me, it relieves

her heart . . . it's better so . . . There is the house. The house of

Kozel, the cabinet-maker . . . a German, well-to-do. Lead the way!"



They went in from the yard and up to the fourth storey. The staircase

got darker and darker as they went up. It was nearly eleven o'clock

and although in summer in Petersburg there is no real night, yet it

was quite dark at the top of the stairs.



A grimy little door at the very top of the stairs stood ajar. A very

poor-looking room about ten paces long was lighted up by a candle-end;

the whole of it was visible from the entrance. It was all in disorder,

littered up with rags of all sorts, especially children's garments.

Across the furthest corner was stretched a ragged sheet. Behind it

probably was the bed. There was nothing in the room except two chairs

and a sofa covered with American leather, full of holes, before which

stood an old deal kitchen-table, unpainted and uncovered. At the edge

of the table stood a smoldering tallow-candle in an iron candlestick.

It appeared that the family had a room to themselves, not part of a

room, but their room was practically a passage. The door leading to

the other rooms, or rather cupboards, into which Amalia Lippevechsel's

flat was divided stood half open, and there was shouting, uproar and

laughter within. People seemed to be playing cards and drinking tea

there. Words of the most unceremonious kind flew out from time to

time.



Raskolnikov recognised Katerina Ivanovna at once. She was a rather

tall, slim and graceful woman, terribly emaciated, with magnificent

dark brown hair and with a hectic flush in her cheeks. She was pacing

up and down in her little room, pressing her hands against her chest;

her lips were parched and her breathing came in nervous broken gasps.

Her eyes glittered as in fever and looked about with a harsh immovable

stare. And that consumptive and excited face with the last flickering

light of the candle-end playing upon it made a sickening impression.

She seemed to Raskolnikov about thirty years old and was certainly a

strange wife for Marmeladov. . . . She had not heard them and did not

notice them coming in. She seemed to be lost in thought, hearing and

seeing nothing. The room was close, but she had not opened the window;

a stench rose from the staircase, but the door on to the stairs was

not closed. From the inner rooms clouds of tobacco smoke floated in,

she kept coughing, but did not close the door. The youngest child, a

girl of six, was asleep, sitting curled up on the floor with her head

on the sofa. A boy a year older stood crying and shaking in the

corner, probably he had just had a beating. Beside him stood a girl of

nine years old, tall and thin, wearing a thin and ragged chemise with

an ancient cashmere pelisse flung over her bare shoulders, long

outgrown and barely reaching her knees. Her arm, as thin as a stick,

was round her brother's neck. She was trying to comfort him,

whispering something to him, and doing all she could to keep him from

whimpering again. At the same time her large dark eyes, which looked

larger still from the thinness of her frightened face, were watching

her mother with alarm. Marmeladov did not enter the door, but dropped

on his knees in the very doorway, pushing Raskolnikov in front of him.

The woman seeing a stranger stopped indifferently facing him, coming

to herself for a moment and apparently wondering what he had come for.

But evidently she decided that he was going into the next room, as he

had to pass through hers to get there. Taking no further notice of

him, she walked towards the outer door to close it and uttered a

sudden scream on seeing her husband on his knees in the doorway.



"Ah!" she cried out in a frenzy, "he has come back! The criminal! the

monster! . . . And where is the money? What's in your pocket, show me!

And your clothes are all different! Where are your clothes? Where is

the money! Speak!"



And she fell to searching him. Marmeladov submissively and obediently

held up both arms to facilitate the search. Not a farthing was there.



"Where is the money?" she cried--"Mercy on us, can he have drunk it

all? There were twelve silver roubles left in the chest!" and in a

fury she seized him by the hair and dragged him into the room.

Marmeladov seconded her efforts by meekly crawling along on his knees.



"And this is a consolation to me! This does not hurt me, but is a

positive con-so-la-tion, ho-nou-red sir," he called out, shaken to and

fro by his hair and even once striking the ground with his forehead.

The child asleep on the floor woke up, and began to cry. The boy in

the corner losing all control began trembling and screaming and rushed

to his sister in violent terror, almost in a fit. The eldest girl was

shaking like a leaf.



"He's drunk it! he's drunk it all," the poor woman screamed in despair

--"and his clothes are gone! And they are hungry, hungry!"--and

wringing her hands she pointed to the children. "Oh, accursed life!

And you, are you not ashamed?"--she pounced all at once upon

Raskolnikov--"from the tavern! Have you been drinking with him? You

have been drinking with him, too! Go away!"



The young man was hastening away without uttering a word. The inner

door was thrown wide open and inquisitive faces were peering in at it.

Coarse laughing faces with pipes and cigarettes and heads wearing caps

thrust themselves in at the doorway. Further in could be seen figures

in dressing gowns flung open, in costumes of unseemly scantiness, some

of them with cards in their hands. They were particularly diverted,

when Marmeladov, dragged about by his hair, shouted that it was a

consolation to him. They even began to come into the room; at last a

sinister shrill outcry was heard: this came from Amalia Lippevechsel

herself pushing her way amongst them and trying to restore order after

her own fashion and for the hundredth time to frighten the poor woman

by ordering her with coarse abuse to clear out of the room next day.

As he went out, Raskolnikov had time to put his hand into his pocket,

to snatch up the coppers he had received in exchange for his rouble in

the tavern and to lay them unnoticed on the window. Afterwards on the

stairs, he changed his mind and would have gone back.



"What a stupid thing I've done," he thought to himself, "they have

Sonia and I want it myself." But reflecting that it would be

impossible to take it back now and that in any case he would not have

taken it, he dismissed it with a wave of his hand and went back to his

lodging. "Sonia wants pomatum too," he said as he walked along the

street, and he laughed malignantly--"such smartness costs money. . . .

Hm! And maybe Sonia herself will be bankrupt to-day, for there is

always a risk, hunting big game . . . digging for gold . . . then they

would all be without a crust to-morrow except for my money. Hurrah for

Sonia! What a mine they've dug there! And they're making the most of

it! Yes, they are making the most of it! They've wept over it and

grown used to it. Man grows used to everything, the scoundrel!"



He sank into thought.



"And what if I am wrong," he cried suddenly after a moment's thought.

"What if man is not really a scoundrel, man in general, I mean, the

whole race of mankind--then all the rest is prejudice, simply

artificial terrors and there are no barriers and it's all as it should

be."







CHAPTER III



He waked up late next day after a broken sleep. But his sleep had not

refreshed him; he waked up bilious, irritable, ill-tempered, and

looked with hatred at his room. It was a tiny cupboard of a room about

six paces in length. It had a poverty-stricken appearance with its

dusty yellow paper peeling off the walls, and it was so low-pitched

that a man of more than average height was ill at ease in it and felt

every moment that he would knock his head against the ceiling. The

furniture was in keeping with the room: there were three old chairs,

rather rickety; a painted table in the corner on which lay a few

manuscripts and books; the dust that lay thick upon them showed that

they had been long untouched. A big clumsy sofa occupied almost the

whole of one wall and half the floor space of the room; it was once

covered with chintz, but was now in rags and served Raskolnikov as a

bed. Often he went to sleep on it, as he was, without undressing,

without sheets, wrapped in his old student's overcoat, with his head

on one little pillow, under which he heaped up all the linen he had,

clean and dirty, by way of a bolster. A little table stood in front of

the sofa.



It would have been difficult to sink to a lower ebb of disorder, but

to Raskolnikov in his present state of mind this was positively

agreeable. He had got completely away from everyone, like a tortoise

in its shell, and even the sight of a servant girl who had to wait

upon him and looked sometimes into his room made him writhe with

nervous irritation. He was in the condition that overtakes some

monomaniacs entirely concentrated upon one thing. His landlady had for

the last fortnight given up sending him in meals, and he had not yet

thought of expostulating with her, though he went without his dinner.

Nastasya, the cook and only servant, was rather pleased at the

lodger's mood and had entirely given up sweeping and doing his room,

only once a week or so she would stray into his room with a broom. She

waked him up that day.



"Get up, why are you asleep?" she called to him. "It's past nine, I

have brought you some tea; will you have a cup? I should think you're

fairly starving?"



Raskolnikov opened his eyes, started and recognised Nastasya.



"From the landlady, eh?" he asked, slowly and with a sickly face

sitting up on the sofa.



"From the landlady, indeed!"



She set before him her own cracked teapot full of weak and stale tea

and laid two yellow lumps of sugar by the side of it.



"Here, Nastasya, take it please," he said, fumbling in his pocket (for

he had slept in his clothes) and taking out a handful of coppers--"run

and buy me a loaf. And get me a little sausage, the cheapest, at the

pork-butcher's."



"The loaf I'll fetch you this very minute, but wouldn't you rather

have some cabbage soup instead of sausage? It's capital soup,

yesterday's. I saved it for you yesterday, but you came in late. It's

fine soup."



When the soup had been brought, and he had begun upon it, Nastasya sat

down beside him on the sofa and began chatting. She was a country

peasant-woman and a very talkative one.



"Praskovya Pavlovna means to complain to the police about you," she

said.



He scowled.



"To the police? What does she want?"



"You don't pay her money and you won't turn out of the room. That's

what she wants, to be sure."



"The devil, that's the last straw," he muttered, grinding his teeth,

"no, that would not suit me . . . just now. She is a fool," he added

aloud. "I'll go and talk to her to-day."



"Fool she is and no mistake, just as I am. But why, if you are so

clever, do you lie here like a sack and have nothing to show for it?

One time you used to go out, you say, to teach children. But why is it

you do nothing now?"



"I am doing . . ." Raskolnikov began sullenly and reluctantly.



"What are you doing?"



"Work . . ."



"What sort of work?"



"I am thinking," he answered seriously after a pause.



Nastasya was overcome with a fit of laughter. She was given to

laughter and when anything amused her, she laughed inaudibly,

quivering and shaking all over till she felt ill.



"And have you made much money by your thinking?" she managed to

articulate at last.



"One can't go out to give lessons without boots. And I'm sick of it."



"Don't quarrel with your bread and butter."



"They pay so little for lessons. What's the use of a few coppers?" he

answered, reluctantly, as though replying to his own thought.



"And you want to get a fortune all at once?"



He looked at her strangely.



"Yes, I want a fortune," he answered firmly, after a brief pause.



"Don't be in such a hurry, you quite frighten me! Shall I get you the

loaf or not?"



"As you please."



"Ah, I forgot! A letter came for you yesterday when you were out."



"A letter? for me! from whom?"



"I can't say. I gave three copecks of my own to the postman for it.

Will you pay me back?"



"Then bring it to me, for God's sake, bring it," cried Raskolnikov

greatly excited--"good God!"



A minute later the letter was brought him. That was it: from his

mother, from the province of R----. He turned pale when he took it. It

was a long while since he had received a letter, but another feeling

also suddenly stabbed his heart.



"Nastasya, leave me alone, for goodness' sake; here are your three

copecks, but for goodness' sake, make haste and go!"



The letter was quivering in his hand; he did not want to open it in

her presence; he wanted to be left /alone/ with this letter. When

Nastasya had gone out, he lifted it quickly to his lips and kissed it;

then he gazed intently at the address, the small, sloping handwriting,

so dear and familiar, of the mother who had once taught him to read

and write. He delayed; he seemed almost afraid of something. At last

he opened it; it was a thick heavy letter, weighing over two ounces,

two large sheets of note paper were covered with very small

handwriting.



 "My dear Rodya," wrote his mother--"it's two months since I last

  had a talk with you by letter which has distressed me and even

  kept me awake at night, thinking. But I am sure you will not blame

  me for my inevitable silence. You know how I love you; you are all

  we have to look to, Dounia and I, you are our all, our one hope,

  our one stay. What a grief it was to me when I heard d definitely enter

  upon your career and might consider that your future is marked out

  and assured for you. Oh, if only this comes to pass! This would be

  such a benefit that we could only look upon it as a providential

  blessing. Dounia is dreaming of nothing else. We have even

  ventured already to drop a few words on the subject to Pyotr

  Petrovitch. He was cautious in his answer, and said that, of

  course, as he could not get on without a secretary, it would be

  better to be paying a salary to a relation than to a stranger, if

  only the former were fitted for the duties (as though there could

  be doubt of your being fitted!) but then he expressed doubts

  whether your studies at the university would leave you time for

  work at his office. The matter dropped for the time, but Dounia is

  thinking of nothing else now. She has been in a sort of fever for

  the last few days, and has already made a regular plan for your

  becoming in the end an associate and even a partner in Pyotr

  Petrovitch's business, which might well be, seeing that you are a

  student of law. I am in complete agreement with her, Rodya, and

  share all her plans and hopes, and think there is every

  probability of realising them. And in spite of Pyotr Petrovitch's

  evasiveness, very natural at present (since he does not know you),

  Dounia is firmly persuaded that she will gain everything by her

  good influence over her future husband; this she is reckoning

  upon. Of course we are careful not to talk of any of these more

  remote plans to Pyotr Petrovitch, especially of your becoming his

  partner. He is a practical man and might take this very coldly, it

  might all seem to him simply a day-dream. Nor has either Dounia or

  I breathed a word to him of the great hopes we have of his helping

  us to pay for your university studies; we have not spoken of it in

  the first place, because it will come to pass of itself, later on,

  and he will no doubt without wasting words offer to do it of

  himself, (as though he could refuse Dounia that) the more readily

  since you may by your own efforts become his right hand in the

  office, and receive this assistance not as a charity, but as a

  salary earned by your own work. Dounia wants to arrange it all

  like this and I quite agree with her. And we have not spoken of

  our plans for another reason, that is, because I particularly

  wanted you to feel on an equal footing when you first meet him.

  When Dounia spoke to him with enthusiasm about you, he answered

  that one could never judge of a man without seeing him close, for

  oneself, and that he looked forward to forming his own opinion

  when he makes your acquaintance. Do you know, my precious Rodya, I

  think that perhaps for some reasons (nothing to do with Pyotr

  Petrovitch though, simply for my own personal, perhaps old-

  womanish, fancies) I should do better to go on living by myself,

  apart, than with them, after the wedding. I am convinced that he

  will be generous and delicate enough to invite me and to urge me

  to remain with my daughter for the future, and if he has said

  nothing about it hitherto, it is simply because it has been taken

  for granted; but I shall refuse. I have noticed more than once in

  my life that husbands don't quite get on with their mothers-in-

  law, and I don't want to be the least bit in anyone's way, and for

  my own sake, too, would rather be quite independent, so long as I

  have a crust of bread of my own, and such children as you and

  Dounia. If possible, I would settle somewhere near you, for the

  most joyful piece of news, dear Rodya, I have kept for the end of

  my letter: know then, my dear boy, that we may, perhaps, be all

  together in a very short time and may embrace one another again

  after a separation of almost three years! It is settled /for

  certain/ that Dounia and I are to set off for Petersburg, exactly

  when I don't know, but very, very soon, possibly in a week. It all

  depends on Pyotr Petrovitch who will let us know when he has had

  time to look round him in Petersburg. To suit his own arrangements

  he is anxious to have the ceremony as soon as possible, even

  before the fast of Our Lady, if it could be managed, or if that is

  too soon to be ready, immediately after. Oh, with what happiness I

  shall press you to my heart! Dounia is all excitement at the

  joyful thought of seeing you, she said one day in joke that she

  would be ready to marry Pyotr Petrovitch for that alone. She is an

  angel! She is not writing anything to you now, and has only told

  me to write that she has so much, so much to tell you that she is

  not going to take up her pen now, for a few lines would tell you

  nothing, and it would only mean upsetting herself; she bids me

  send you her love and innumerable kisses. But although we shall be

  meeting so soon, perhaps I shall send you as much money as I can

  in a day or two. Now that everyone has heard that Dounia is to

  marry Pyotr Petrovitch, my credit has suddenly improved and I know

  that Afanasy Ivanovitch will trust me now even to seventy-five

  roubles on the security of my pension, so that perhaps I shall be

  able to send you twenty-five or even thirty roubles. I would send

  you more, but I am uneasy about our travelling expenses; for

  though Pyotr Petrovitch has been so kind as to undertake part of

  the expenses of the journey, that is to say, he has taken upon

  himself the conveyance of our bags and big trunk (which will be

  conveyed through some acquaintances of his), we must reckon upon

  some expense on our arrival in Petersburg, where we can't be left

  without a halfpenny, at least for the first few days. But we have

  calculated it all, Dounia and I, to the last penny, and we see

  that the journey will not cost very much. It is only ninety versts

  from us to the railway and we have come to an agreement with a

  driver we know, so as to be in readiness; and from there Dounia

  and I can travel quite comfortably third class. So that I may very

  likely be able to send to you not twenty-five, but thirty roubles.

  But enough; I have covered two sheets already and there is no

  space left for more; our whole history, but so many events have

  happened! And now, my precious Rodya, I embrace you and send you a

  mother's blessing till we meet. Love Dounia your sister, Rodya;

  love her as she loves you and understand that she loves you beyond

  everything, more than herself. She is an angel and you, Rodya, you

  are everything to us--our one hope, our one consolation. If only

  you are happy, we shall be happy. Do you still say your prayers,

  Rodya, and believe in the mercy of our Creator and our Redeemer? I

  am afraid in my heart that you may have been visited by the new

  spirit of infidelity that is abroad to-day; If it is so, I pray

  for you. Remember, dear boy, how in your childhood, when your

  father was living, you used to lisp your prayers at my knee, and

  how happy we all were in those days. Good-bye, till we meet then--

  I embrace you warmly, warmly, with many kisses.



"Yours till death,



"PULCHERIA RASKOLNIKOV."





Almost from the first, while he read the letter, Raskolnikov's face

was wet with tears; but when he finished it, his face was pale and

distorted and a bitter, wrathful and malignant smile was on his lips.

He laid his head down on his threadbare dirty pillow and pondered,

pondered a long time. His heart was beating violently, and his brain

was in a turmoil. At last he felt cramped and stifled in the little

yellow room that was like a cupboard or a box. His eyes and his mind

craved for space. He took up his hat and went out, this time without

dread of meeting anyone; he had forgotten his dread. He turned in the

direction of the Vassilyevsky Ostrov, walking along Vassilyevsky

Prospect, as though hastening on some business, but he walked, as his

habit was, without noticing his way, muttering and even speaking aloud

to himself, to the astonishment of the passers-by. Many of them took

hlong ago his present anguish had its first beginnings; it had

waxed and gathered strength, it had matured and concentrated, until it

had taken the form of a fearful, frenzied and fantastic question,

which tortured his heart and mind, clamouring insistently for an

answer. Now his mother's letter had burst on him like a thunderclap.

It was clear that he must not now suffer passively, worrying himself

over unsolved questions, but that he must do something, do it at once,

and do it quickly. Anyway he must decide on something, or else . . .



"Or throw up life altogether!" he cried suddenly, in a frenzy--"accept

one's lot humbly as it is, once for all and stifle everything in

oneself, giving up all claim to activity, life and love!"



"Do you understand, sir, do you understand what it means when you have

absolutely nowhere to turn?" Marmeladov's question came suddenly into

his mind, "for every man must have somewhere to turn. . . ."



He gave a sudden start; another thought, that he had had yesterday,

slipped back into his mind. But he did not start at the thought

recurring to him, for he knew, he had /felt beforehand/, that it must

come back, he was expecting it; besides it was not only yesterday's

thought. The difference was that a month ago, yesterday even, the

thought was a mere dream: but now . . . now it appeared not a dream at

all, it had taken a new menacing and quite unfamiliar shape, and he

suddenly became aware of this himself. . . . He felt a hammering in

his head, and there was a darkness before his eyes.



He looked round hurriedly, he was searching for something. He wanted

to sit down and was looking for a seat; he was walking along the K----

Boulevard. There was a seat about a hundred paces in front of him. He

walked towards it as fast he could; but on the way he met with a

little adventure which absorbed all his attention. Looking for the

seat, he had noticed a woman walking some twenty paces in front of

him, but at first he took no more notice of her than of other objects

that crossed his path. It had happened to him many times going home

not to notice the road by which he was going, and he was accustomed to

walk like that. But there was at first sight something so strange

about the woman in front of him, that gradually his attention was

riveted upon her, at first reluctantly and, as it were, resentfully,

and then more and more intently. He felt a sudden desire to find out

what it was that was so strange about the woman. In the first place,

she appeared to be a girl quite young, and she was walking in the

great heat bareheaded and with no parasol or gloves, waving her arms

about in an absurd way. She had on a dress of some light silky

material, but put on strangely awry, not properly hooked up, and torn

open at the top of the skirt, close to the waist: a great piece was

rent and hanging loo take as much from the other

fellow to allow him to have the girl and so let it end. And why did I

want to interfere? Is it for me to help? Have I any right to help? Let

them devour each other alive--what is to me? How did I dare to give

him twenty copecks? Were they mine?"



In spite of those strange words he felt very wretched. He sat down on

the deserted seat. His thoughts strayed aimlessly. . . . He found it

hard to fix his mind on anything at that moment. He longed to forget

himself altogether, to forget everything, and then to wake up and

begin life anew. . . .



"Poor girl!" he said, looking at the empty corner where she had sat--

"She will come to herself and weep, and then her mother will find out.

. . . She will give her a beating, a horrible, shameful beating and

then maybe, turn her out of doors. . . . And even if she does not, the

Darya Frantsovnas will get wind of it, and the girl will soon be

slipping out on the sly here and there. Then there will be the

hospital directly (that's always the luck of those girls with

respectable mothers, who go wrong on the sly) and then . . . again the

hospital . . . drink . . . the taverns . . . and more hospital, in two

or three years--a wreck, and her life over at eighteen or nineteen.

. . . Have not I seen cases like that? And how have they been brought

to it? Why, they've all come to it like that. Ugh! But what does it

matter? That's as it should be, they tell us. A certain percentage,

they tell us, must every year go . . . that way . . . to the devil, I

suppose, so that the rest may remain chaste, and not be interfered

with. A percentage! What splendid words they have; they are so

scientific, so consolatory. . . . Once you've said 'percentage'

there's nothing more to worry about. If we had any other word . . .

maybe we might feel more uneasy. . . . But what if Dounia were one of

the percentage! Of another one if not that one?



"But where am I going?" he thought suddenly. "Strange, I came out for

something. As soon as I had read the letter I came out. . . . I was

going to Vassilyevsky Ostrov, to Razumihin. That's what it was . . .

now I remember. What for, though? And what put the idea of going to

Razumihin into my head just now? That's curious."



He wondered at himself. Razumihin was one of his old comrades at the

university. It was remarkable that Raskolnikov had hardly any friends

at the university; he kept aloof from everyone, went to see no one,

and did not welcome anyone who came to see him, and indeed everyone

soon gave him up. He took no part in the students' gatherings,

amusements or conversations. He worked with great intensity without

sparing himself, and he was respected for this, but no one liked him.

He was very poor, and there was a sort of haughty pride and reserve

about him, as though he were keeping something to himself. He seemed

to some of his comrades to look down upon them all as children, as

though he were superior in development, knowledge and convictions, as

though their beliefs and interests were beneath him.



With Razumihin he had got on, or, at least, he was more unreserved and

communicative with him. Indeed it was impossible to be on any other

terms with Razumihin. He was an exceptionally good-humoured and candid

youth, good-natured to the point of simplicity, though both depth and

dignity lay concealed under that simplicity. The better of his

comrades understood this, and all were fond of him. He was extremely

intelligent, though he was certainly rather a simpleton at times. He

was of striking appearance--tall, thin, blackhaired and always badly

shaved. He was sometimes uproarious and was reputed to be of great

physical strength. One night, when out in a festive company, he had

with one blow laid a gigantic policeman on his back. There was no

limit to his drinking powers, but he could abstain from drink

altogether; he sometimes went too far in his pranks; but he could do

without pranks altogether. Another thing striking about Razumihin, no

failure distressed him, and it seemed as though no unfavourable

circumstances could crush him. He could lodge anywhere, and bear the

extremes of cold and hunger. He was very poor, and kept himself

entirely on what he could earn by work of one sort or another. He knew

of no end of resources by which to earn money. He spent one whole

winter without lighting his stove, and used to declare that he liked

it better, because one slept more soundly in the cold. For the present

he, too, had been obliged to give up the university, but it was only

for a time, and he was working with all his might to save enough to

return to his studies again. Raskolnikov had not been to see him for

the last four months, and Razumihin did not even know his address.

About two months before, they had met in the street, but Raskolnikov

had turned away and even crossed to the other side that he might not

be observed. And though Razumihin noticed him, he passed him by, as he

did not want to annoy him.







CHAPTER V



"Of course, I've been meaning lately to go to Razumihin's to ask for

work, to ask him to get me lessons or something . . ." Raskolnikov

thought, "but what help can he be to me now? Suppose he gets me

lessons, suppose he shares his last farthing with me, if he has any

farthings, so that I could get some boots and make myself tidy enough

to give lessons . . . hm . . . Well and what then? What shall I do

with the few coppers I earn? That's not what I want now. It's really

absurd for me to go to Razumihin. . . ."



The question why he was now going to Razumihin agitated him even more

than he was himself aware; he kept uneasily seeking for some sinister

significance in this apparently ordinary action.



"Could I have expected to set it all straight and to find a way out by

means of Razumihin alone?" he asked himself in perplexity.



He pondered and rubbed his forehead, and, strange to say, after long

musing, suddenly, as if it were spontaneously and by chance, a

fantastic thought came into his head.



"Hm . . . to Razumihin's," he said all at once, calmly, as though he

had reached a final determination. "I shall go to Razumihin's of

course, but . . . not now. I shall go to him . . . on the next day

after It, when It will be over and everything will begin

afresh. . . ."



And suddenly he realised what he was thinking.



"After It," he shouted, jumping up from the seat, "but is It really

going to happen? Is it possible it really will happen?" He left the

seat, and went off almost at a run; he meant to turn back, homewards,

but the thought of going home suddenly filled him with intense

loathing; in that hole, in that awful little cupboard of his, all

/this/ had for a month past been growing up in him; and he walked on

at random.



His nervous shudder had passed into a fever that made him feel

shivering; in spite of the heat he felt cold. With a kind of effort he

began almost unconsciously, from some inner craving, to stare at all

the objects before him, as though looking for something to distract

his attention; but he did not succeed, and kept dropping every moment

into brooding. When with a start he lifted his head again and looked

round, he forgot at once what he had just been thinking about and even

where he was going. In this way he walked right across Vassilyevsky

Ostrov, came out on to the Lesser Neva, crossed the bridge and turned

towards the islands. The greenness and freshness were at first restful

to his weary eyes after the dust of the town and the huge houses that

hemmed him in and weighed upon him. Here there were no taverns, no

stifling closeness, no stench. But soon these new pleasant sensations

passed into morbid irritability. Sometimes he stood still before a

brightly painted summer villa standing among green foliage, he gazed

through the fence, he saw in the distance smartly dressed women on the

verandahs and balconies, and children running in the gardens. The

flowers especially caught his attention; he gazed at them longer than

at anything. He was met, too, by luxurious carriages and by men and

women on horseback; he watched them with curious eyes and forgot about

them before they had vanished from his sight. Once he stood still and

counted his money; he found he had thirty copecks. "Twenty to the

policeman, three to Nastasya for the letter, so I must have given

forty-seven or fifty to the Marmeladovs yesterday," he thought,

reckoning it up for some unknown reason, but he soon forgot with what

object he had taken the money out of his pocket. He recalled it on

passing an eating-house or tavern, and felt that he was hungry. . . .

Going into the tavern he drank a glass of vodka and ate a pie of some

sort. He finished eating it as he walked away. It was a long while

since he had taken vodka and it had an effect upon him at once, though

he only drank a wineglassful. His legs felt suddenly heavy and a great

drowsiness came upon him. He turned homewards, but reaching Petrovsky

Ostrov he stopped completely exhausted, turned off the road into the

bushes, sank down upon the grass and instantly fell asleep.



In a morbid condition of the brain, dreams often have a singular

actuality, vividness, and extraordinary semblance of reality. At times

monstrous images are created, but the setting and the whole picture

are so truthlike and filled with details so delicate, so unexpectedly,

but so artistically consistent, that the dreamer, were he an artist

like Pushkin or Turgenev even, could never have invented them in the

waking state. Such sick dreams always remain long in the memory and

make a powerful impression on the overwrought and deranged nervous

system.



Raskolnikov had a fearful dream. He dreamt he was back in his

childhood in the little town of his birth. He was a child about seven

years old, walking into the country with his father on the evening of

a holiday. It was a grey and heavy day, the country was exactly as he

remembered it; indeed he recalled it far more vividly in his dream

than he had done in memory. The little town stood on a level flat as

bare as the hand, not even a willow near it; only in the far distance,

a copse lay, a dark blur on the very edge of the horizon. A few paces

beyond the last market garden stood a tavern, a big tavern, which had

always aroused in him a feeling of aversion, even of fear, when he

walked by it with his father. There was always a crowd there, always

shouting, laughter and abuse, hideous hoarse singing and often

fighting. Drunken and horrible-looking figures were hanging about the

tavern. He used to cling close to his father, trembling all over when

he met them. Near the tavern the road became a dusty track, the dust

of which was always black. It was a winding road, and about a hundred

paces further on, it turned to the right to the graveyard. In the

middle of the graveyard stood a stone church with a green cupola where

he used to go to mass two or three times a year with his father and

mother, when a service was held in memory of his grandmother, who had

long been dead, and whom he had never seen. On these occasions they

used to take on a white dish tied up in a table napkin a special sort

of rice pudding with raisins stuck in it in the shape of a cross. He

loved that church, the old-fashioned, unadorned ikons and the old

priest with the shaking head. Near his grandmother's grave, which was

marked by a stone, was the little grave of his youngerone shouted in the crowd.



"Why wouldn't she gallop then?"



"My property!" shouted Mikolka, with bloodshot eyes, brandishing the

bar in his hands. He stood as though regretting that he had nothing

more to beat.



"No mistake about it, you are not a Christian," many voices were

shouting in the crowd.



But the poor boy, beside himself, made his way, screaming, through the

crowd to the sorrel nag, put his arms round her bleeding dead head and

kissed it, kissed the eyes and kissed the lips. . . . Then he jumped

up and flew in a frenzy with his little fists out at Mikolka. At that

instant his father, who had been running after him, snatched him up

and carried him out of the crowd.



"Come along, come! Let us go home," he said to him.



"Father! Why did they . . . kill . . . the poor horse!" he sobbed, but

his voice broke and the words came in shrieks from his panting chest.



"They are drunk. . . . They are brutal . . . it's not our business!"

said his father. He put his arms round his father but he felt choked,

choked. He tried to draw a breath, to cry out--and woke up.



He waked up, gasping for breath, his hair soaked with perspiration,

and stood up in terror.



"Thank God, that was only a dream," he said, sitting down under a tree

and drawing deep breaths. "But what is it? Is it some fever coming on?

Such a hideous dream!"



He felt utterly broken: darkness and confusion were in his soul. He

rested his elbows on his knees and leaned his head on his hands.



"Good God!" he cried, "can it be, can it be, that I shall really take

an axe, that I shall strike her on the head, split her skull open

. . . that I shall tread in the sticky warm blood, break the lock,

steal and tremble; hide, all spattered in the blood . . . with the

axe. . . . Good God, can it be?"



He was shaking like a leaf as he said this.



"But why am I going on like this?" he continued, sitting up again, as

it were in profound amazement. "I knew that I could never bring myself

to it, so what have I been torturing myself for till now? Yesterday,

yesterday, when I went to make that . . . /experiment/, yesterday I

realised completely that I could never bear to do it. . . . Why am I

going over it again, then? Why am I hesitating? As I came down the

stairs yesterday, I said myself that it was base, loathsome, vile,

vile . . . the very thought of it made me feel sick and filled me with

horror.



"No, I couldn't do it, I couldn't do it! Granted, granted that there

is no flaw in all that reasoning, that all that I have concluded this

last month is clear as day, true as arithmetic. . . . My God! Anyway I

couldn't bring myself to it! I couldn't do it, I couldn't do it! Why,

why then am I still . . . ?"



He rose to his feet, looked round in wonder as though surprised at

finding himself in this place, and went towards the bridge. He was

pale, his eyes glowed, he was exhausted in every limb, but he seemed

suddenly to breathe more easily. He felt he had cast off that fearful

burden that had so long been weighing upon him, and all at once there

was a sense of relief and peace in his soul. "Lord," he prayed, "show

me my path--I renounce that accursed . . . dream of mine."



Crossing the bridge, he gazed quietly and calmly at the Neva, at the

glowing red sun setting in the glowing sky. In spite of his weakness

he was not conscious of fatigue. It was as though an abscess that had

been forming for a month past in his heart had suddenly broken.

Freedom, freedom! He was free from that spell, that sorcery, that

obsession!



Later on, when he recalled that time and all that happened to him

during those days, minute by minute, point by point, he was

superstitiously impressed by one circumstance, which, though in

itself not very exceptional, always seemed to him afterwards the

predestined turning-point of his fate. He could never understand and

explain to himself why, when he was tired and worn out, when it

would have been more convenient for him to go home by the shortest and

most direct way, he had returned by the Hay Market where he had no

need to go. It was obviously and quite unnecessarily out of his way,

though not much so. It is true that it happened to him dozens of times

to return home without noticing what streets he passed through. But

why, he was always asking himself, why had such an important, such a

decisive and at the same time such an absolutely chance meeting

happened in the Hay Market (where he had moreover no reason to go)

at the very hour, the very minute of his life when he was just in

the very mood and in the very circumstances in which that meeting

was able to exert the gravest and most decisive influence on his whole

destiny? As though it had been lying in wait for him on purpose!



It was about nine o'clock when he crossed the Hay Market. At the

tables and the barrows, at the booths and the shops, all the market

people were closing their establishments or clearing away and packing

up their wares and, like their customers, were going home. Rag pickers

and costermongers of all kinds were crowding round the taverns in the

dirty and stinking courtyards of the Hay Market. Raskolnikov

particularly liked this place and the neighbouring alleys, when he

wandered aimlessly in the streets. Here his rags did not attract

contemptuous attention, and one could walk about in any attire without

scandalising people. At the corner of an alley a huckster and his wife

had two tables set out with tapes, thread, cotton handkerchiefs, etc.

They, too, had got up to go home, but were lingering in conversation

with a friend, who had just come up to them. This friend was Lizaveta

Ivanovna, or, as everyone called her, Lizaveta, the younger sister of

the old pawnbroker, Alyona Ivanovna, whom Raskolnikov had visited the

previous day to pawn his watch and make his /experiment/. . . . He

already knew all about Lizaveta and she knew him a little too. She was

a single woman of about thirty-five, tall, clumsy, timid, submissive

and almost idiotic. She was a complete slave and went in fear and

trembling of her sister, who made her work day and night, and even

beat her. She was standing with a bundle before the huckster and his

wife, listening earnestly and doubtfully. They were talking of

something with special warmth. The moment Raskolnikov caught sight of

her, he was overcome by a strange sensation as it were of intense

astonishment, though there was nothing astonishing about this meeting.



"You could make up your mind for yourself, Lizaveta Ivanovna," the

huckster was saying aloud. "Come round to-morrow about seven. They

will be here too."



"To-morrow?" said Lizaveta slowly and thoughtfully, as though unable

to make up her mind.



"Upon my word, what a fright you are in of Alyona Ivanovna," gabbled

the huckster's wife, a lively little woman. "I look at you, you are

like some little babe. And she is not your own sister either-nothing

but a step-sister and what a hand she keeps over you!"



"But this time don't say a word to Alyona Ivanovna," her husband

interrupted; "that's my advice, but come round to us without asking.

It will be worth your while. Later on your sister herself may have a

notion."



"Am I to come?"



"About seven o'clock to-morrow. And they will be here. You will be

able to decide for yourself."



"And we'll have a cup of tea," added his wife.



"All right, I'll come," said Lizaveta, still pondering, and she began

slowly moving away.



Raskolnikov had just passed and heard no more. He passed softly,

unnoticed, trying not to miss a word. His first amazement was followed

by a thrill of horror, like a shiver running down his spine. He had

learnt, he had suddenly quite unexpectedly learnt, that the next day

at seven o'clock Lizaveta, the old woman's sister and only companion,

would be away from home and that therefore at seven o'clock precisely

the old woman /would be left alone/.



He was only a few steps from his lodging. He went in like a man

condemned to death. He thought of nothing and was incapable of

thinking; but he felt suddenly in his whole being that he had no more

freedom of thought, no will, and that everything was suddenly and

irrevocably decided.



Certainly, if he had to wait whole years for a suitable opportunity,

he could not reckon on a more certain step towards the success of the

plan than that which had just presented itself. In any case, it would

have been difficult to find out beforehand and with certainty, with

greater exactness and less risk, and without dangerous inquiries and

investigations, that next day at a certain time an old woman, on whose

life an attempt was contemplated, would be at home and entirely alone.







CHAPTER VI



Later on Raskolnikov happened to find out why the huckster and his

wife had invited Lizaveta. It was a very ordinary matter and there was

nothing exceptional about it. A family who had come to the town and

been reduced to poverty were selling their household goods and

clothes, all women's things. As the things would have fetched little

in the market, they were looking for a dealer. This was Lizaveta's

business. She undertook such jobs and was frequently employed, as she

was very honest and always fixed a fair price and stuck to it. She

spoke as a rule little and, as we have said already, she was very

submissive and timid.



But Raskolnikov had become superstitious of late. The traces of

superstition remained in him long after, and were almost ineradicable.

And in all this he was always afterwards disposed to see something

strange and mysterious, as it were, the presence of some peculiar

influences and coincidences. In the previous winter a student he knew

called Pokorev, who had left for Harkov, had chanced in conversation

to give him the address of Alyona Ivanovna, the old pawnbroker, in

case he might want to pawn anything. For a long while he did not go to

her, for he had lessons and managed to get along somehow. Six weeks

ago he had remembered the address; he had two articles that could be

pawned: his father's old silver watch and a little gold ring with

three red stones, a present from his sister at parting. He decided to

take the ring. When he found the old woman he had felt an

insurmountable repulsion for her at the first glance, though he knew

nothing special about her. He got two roubles from her and went into a

miserable little tavern on his way home. He asked for tea, sat down

and sank into deep thought. A strange idea was pecking at his brain

like a chicken in the egg, and very, very much absorbed him.



Almost beside him at the next table there was sitting a student, whom

he did not know and had never seen, and with him a young officer. They

had played a game of billiards and began drinking tea. All at once he

heard the student mention to the officer the pawnbroker Alyona

Ivanovna and give him her address. This of itself seemed strange to

Raskolnikov; he had just come from her and here at once he heard her

name. Of course it was a chance, but he could not shake off a very

extraordinary impression, and here someone seemed to be speaking

expressly for him; the student began telling his friend various

details about Alyona Ivanovna.



"She is first-rate," he said. "You can always get money from her. She

is as rich as a Jew, she can give you five thousand roubles at a time

and she is not above taking a pledge for a rouble. Lots of our fellows

have had dealings with her. But she is an awful old harpy. . . ."



And he began describing how spiteful and uncertain she was, how if you

were only a day late with your interest the pledge was lost; how she

gave a quarter of the value of an article and took five and even seven

percent a month on it and so on. The student chattered on, saying that

she had a sister Lizaveta, whom the wretched little creature was

continually beating, and kept in complete bondage like a small child,

though Lizaveta was at least six feet high.



"There's a phenomenon for you," cried the student and he laughed.



They began talking about Lizaveta. The student spoke about her with a

peculiar relish and was continually laughing and the officer listened

with great interest and asked him to send Lizaveta to do some mending

for him. Raskolnikov did not miss a word and learned everything about

her. Lizaveta was younger than the old woman and was her half-sister,

being the child of a different mother. She was thirty-five. She worked

day and night for her sister, and besides doing the cooking and the

washing, she did sewing and worked as a charwoman and gave her sister

all she earned. She did not dare to accept an order or job of any kind

without her sister's permission. The old woman had already made her

will, and Lizaveta knew of it, and by this will she would not get a

farthing; nothing but the movables, chairs and so on; all the money

was left to a monastery in the province of N----, that prayers might

be said for her in perpetuity. Lizaveta was of lower rank than her

sister, unmarried and awfully uncouth in appearance, remarkably tall

with long feet that looked as if they were bent outwards. She always

wore battered goatskin shoes, and was clean in her person. What the

student expressed most surprise and amusement about was the fact that

Lizaveta was continually with child.



"But you say she is hideous?" observed the officer.



"Yes, she is so dark-skinned and looks like a soldier dressed up, but

you know she is not at all hideous. She has such a good-natured face

and eyes. Strikingly so. And the proof of it is that lots of people

are attracted by her. She is such a soft, gentle creature, ready to

put up with anything, always willing, willing to do anything. And her

smile is really very sweet."



"You seem to find her attractive yourself," laughed the officer.



"From her queerness. No, I'll tell you what. I could kill that damned

old woman and make off with her money, I assure you, without the

faintest conscience-prick," the student added with warmth. The officer

laughed again while Raskolnikov shuddered. How strange it was!



"Listen, I want to ask you a serious question," the student said

hotly. "I was joking of course, but look here; on one side we have a

stupid, senseless, worthless, spiteful, ailing, horrid old woman, not

simply useless but doing actual mischief, who has not an idea what she

is living for herself, and who will die in a day or two in any case.

You understand? You understand?"



"Yes, yes, I understand," answered the officer, watching his excited

companion attentively.



"Well, listen then. On the other side, fresh young lives thrown away

for want of help and by thousands, on every side! A hundred thousand

good deeds could be done and helped, on that old woman's money which

will be buried in a monastery! Hundreds, thousands perhaps, might be

set on the right path; dozens of families saved from destitution, from

ruin, from vice, from the Lock hospitals--and all with her money. Kill

her, take her money and with the help of it devote oneself to the

service of humanity and the good of all. What do you think, would

not one tiny crime be wiped out by thousands of good deeds? For one

life thousands would be saved from corruption and decay. One death,

and a hundred lives in exchange--it's simple arithmetic! Besides, what

value has the life of that sickly, stupid, ill-natured old woman in

the balance of existence! No more than the life of a louse, of a

black-beetle, less in fact because the old woman is doing harm. She is

wearing out the lives of others; the other day she bit Lizaveta's

finger out of spite; it almost had to be amputated."



"Of course she does not deserve to live," remarked the officer, "but

there it is, it's nature."



"Oh, well, brother, but we have to correct and direct nature, and, but

for that, we should drown in an ocean of prejudice. But for that,

there would never have been a single great man. They talk of duty,

conscience--I don't want to say anything against duty and conscience;

--but the point is, what do we mean by them. Stay, I have another

question to ask you. Listen!"



"No, you stay, I'll ask you a question. Listen!"



"Well?"



"You are talking and speechifying away, but tell me, would you kill

the old woman /yourself/?"



"Of course not! I was only arguing the justice of it. . . . It's

nothing to do with me. . . ."



"But I think, if you would not do it yourself, there's no justice

about it. . . . Let us have another game."



Raskolnikov was violently agitated. Of course, it was all ordinary

youthful talk and thought, such as he had often heard before in

different forms and on different themes. But why had he happened to

hear such a discussion and such ideas at the very moment when his own

brain was just conceiving . . . /the very same ideas/? And why, just

at the moment when he had brought away the embryo of his idea from the

old woman had he dropped at once upon a conversation about her? This

coincidence always seemed strange to him. This trivial talk in a

tavern had an immense influence on him in his later action; as though

there had really been in it something preordained, some guiding

hint. . . .



*****



On returning from the Hay Market he flung himself on the sofa and sat

for a whole hour without stirring. Meanwhile it got dark; he had no

candle and, indeed, it did not occur to him to light up. He could

never recollect whether he had been thinking about anything at that

time. At last he was conscious of his former fever and shivering, and

he realised with relief that he could lie down on the sofa. Soon

heavy, leaden sleep came over him, as it were crushing him.



He slept an extraordinarily long time and without dreaming. Nastasya,

coming into his room at ten o'clock the next morning, had difficulty

in rousing him. She brought him in tea and bread. The tea was again

the second brew and again in her own tea-pot.



"My goodness, how he sleeps!" she cried indignantly. "And he is always

asleep."



He got up with an effort. His head ached, he stood up, took a turn in

his garret and sank back on the sofa again.



"Going to sleep again," cried Nastasya. "Are you ill, eh?"



He made no reply.



"Do you want some tea?"



"Afterwards," he said with an effort, closing his eyes again and

turning to the wall.



Nastasya stood over him.



"Perhaps he really is ill," she said, turned and went out. She came in

again at two o'clock with soup. He was lying as before. The tea stood

untouched. Nastasya felt positively offended and began wrathfully

rousing him.



"Why are you lying like a log?" she shouted, looking at him with

repulsion.



He got up, and sat down again, but said nothing and stared at the

floor.



"Are you ill or not?" asked Nastasya and again received no answer.

"You'd better go out and get a breath of air," she said after a pause.

"Will you eat it or not?"



"Afterwards," he said weakly. "You can go."



And he motioned her out.



She remained a little longer, looked at him with compassion and went

out.



A few minutes afterwards, he raised his eyes and looked for a long

while at the tea and the soup. Then he took the bread, took up a spoon

and began to eat.



He ate a little, three or four spoonfuls, without appetite, as it

were mechanically. His head ached less. After his meal he stretched

himself on the sofa again, but now he could not sleep; he lay

without stirring, with his face in the pillow. He was haunted by

day-dreams and such strange day-dreams; in one, that kept recurring,

he fancied that he was in Africa, in Egypt, in some sort of oasis. The

caravan was resting, the camels were peacefully lying down; the

palms stood all around in a complete circle; all the party were at

dinner. But he was drinking water from a spring which flowed

gurgling close by. And it was so cool, it was wonderful, wonderful,

blue, cold water running among the parti-coloured stones and over

the clean sand which glistened here and there like gold. . . .

Suddenly he heard a clock strike. He started, roused himself, raised

his head, looked out of the window, and seeing how late it was,

suddenly jumped up wide awake as though someone had pulled him off

the sofa. He crept on tiptoe to the door, stealthily opened it and

began listening on the staircase. His heart beat terribly. But all was

quiet on the stairs as if everyone was asleep. . . . It seemed to him

strange and monstrous that he could have slept in such forgetfulness

from the previous day and had done nothing, had prepared nothing

yet. . . . And meanwhile perhaps it had struck six. And his drowsiness

and stupefaction were followed by an extraordinary, feverish, as it

were distracted haste. But the preparations to be made were few. He

concentrated all his energies on thinking of everything and forgetting

nothing; and his heart kept beating and thumping so that he could

hardly breathe. First he had to make a noose and sew it into his

overcoat--a work of a moment. He rummaged under his pillow and picked

out amongst the linen stuffed away under it, a worn out, old unwashed

shirt. From its rags he tore a long strip, a couple of inches wide and

about sixteen inches long. He folded this strip in two, took off his

wide, strong summer overcoat of some stout cotton material (his only

outer garment) and began sewing the two ends of the rag on the inside,

under the left armhole. His hands shook as he sewed, but he did it

successfully so that nothing showed outside when he put the coat on

again. The needle and thread he had got ready long before and they lay

on his table in a piece of paper. As for the noose, it was a very

ingenious device of his own; the noose was intended for the axe. It

was impossible for him to carry the axe through the street in his

hands. And if hidden under his coat he would still have had to support

it with his hand, which would have been noticeable. Now he had only to

put the head of the axe in the noose, and it would hang quietly under

his arm on the inside. Putting his hand in his coat pocket, he could

hold the end of the handle all the way, so that it did not swing; and

as the coat was very full, a regular sack in fact, it could not be

seen from outside that he was holding something with the hand that was

in the pocket. This noose, too, he had designed a fortnight before.



When he had finished with this, he thrust his hand into a little

opening between his sofa and the floor, fumbled in the left corner and

drew out the /pledge/, which he had got ready long before and hidden

there. This pledge was, however, only a smoothly planed piece of wood

the size and thickness of a silver cigarette case. He picked up this

piece of wood in one of his wanderings in a courtyard where there was

some sort of a workshop. Afterwards he had added to the wood a thin

smooth piece of iron, which he had also picked up at the same time in

the street. Putting the iron which was a little the smaller on the

piece of wood, he fastened them very firmly, crossing and re-crossing

the thread round them; then wrapped them carefully and daintily in

clean white paper and tied up the parcel so that it would be very

difficult to untie it. This was in order to divert the attention of

the old woman for a time, while she was trying to undo the knot, and

so to gain a moment. The iron strip was added to give weight, so that

the woman might not guess the first minute that the "thing" was made

of wood. All this had been stored by him beforehand under the sofa. He

had only just got the pledge out when he heard someone suddenly about

in the yard.



"It struck six long ago."



"Long ago! My God!"



He rushed to the door, listened, caught up his hat and began to

descend his thirteen steps cautiously, noiselessly, like a cat. He had

still the most important thing to do--to steal the axe from the

kitchen. That the deed must be done with an axe he had decided long

ago. He had also a pocket pruning-knife, but he could not rely on the

knife and still less on his own strength, and so resolved finally on

the axe. We may note in passing, one peculiarity in regard to all the

final resolutions taken by him in the matter; they had one strange

characteristic: the more final they were, the more hideous and the

more absurd they at once became in his eyes. In spite of all his

agonising inward struggle, he never for a single instant all that time

could believe in the carrying out of his plans.



And, indeed, if it had ever happened that everything to the least

point could have been considered and finally settled, and no

uncertainty of any kind had remained, he would, it seems, have

renounced it all as something absurd, monstrous and impossible. But a

whole mass of unsettled points and uncertainties remained. As for

getting the axe, that trifling business cost him no anxiety, for

nothing could be easier. Nastasya was continually out of the house,

especially in the evenings; she would run in to the neighbours or to a

shop, and always left the door ajar. It was the one thing the landlady

was always scolding her about. And so, when the time came, he would

only have to go quietly into the kitchen and to take the axe, and an

hour later (when everything was over) go in and put it back again. But

these were doubtful points. Supposing he returned an hour later to put

it back, and Nastasya had come back and was on the spot. He would of

course have to go by and wait till she went out again. But supposing

she were in the meantime to miss the axe, look for it, make an outcry

--that would mean suspicion or at least grounds for suspicion.



But those were all trifles which he had not even begun to consider,

and indeed he had no time. He was thinking of the chief point, and put

off trifling details, until /he could believe in it all/. But that

seemed utterly unattainable. So it seemed to himself at least. He

could not imagine, for instance, that he would sometime leave off

thinking, get up and simply go there. . . . Even his late experiment

(i.e. his visit with the object of a final survey of the place) was

simply an attempt at an experiment, far from being the real thing, as

though one should say "come, let us go and try it--why dream about

it!"--and at once he had broken down and had run away cursing, in a

frenzy with himself. Meanwhile it would seem, as regards the moral

question, that his analysis was complete; his casuistry had become

keen as a razor, and he could not find rational objections in himself.

But in the last resort he simply ceased to believe in himself, and

doggedly, slavishly sought arguments in all directions, fumbling for

them, as though someone were forcing and drawing him to it.



At first--long before indeed--he had been much occupied with one

question; why almost all crimes are so badly concealed and so easily

detected, and why almost all criminals leave such obvious traces? He

had come gradually to many different and curious conclusions, and in

his opinion the chief reason lay not so much in the material

impossibility of concealing the crime, as in the criminal himself.

Almost every criminal is subject to a failure of will and reasoning

power by a childish and phenomenal heedlessness, at the very instant

when prudence and caution are most essential. It was his conviction

that this eclipse of reason and failure of will power attacked a man

like a disease, developed gradually and reached its highest point just

before the perpetration of the crime, continued with equal violence at

the moment of the crime and for longer or shorter time after,

according to the individual case, and then passed off like any other

disease. The question whether the disease gives rise to the crime, or

whether the crime from its own peculiar nature is always accompanied

by something of the nature of disease, he did not yet feel able to

decide.



When he reached these conclusions, he decided that in his own case

there could not be such a morbid reaction, that his reason and will

would remain unimpaired at the time of carrying out his design, for

the simple reason that his design was "not a crime. . . ." We will

omit all the process by means of which he arrived at this last

conclusion; we have run too far ahead already. . . . We may add only

that the practical, purely material difficulties of the affair

occupied a secondary position in his mind. "One has but to keep all

one's will-power and reason to deal with them, and they will all be

overcome at the time when once one has familiarised oneself with the

minutest details of the business. . . ." But this preparation had

never been begun. His final decisions were what he came to trust

least, and when the hour struck, it all came to pass quite

differently, as it were accidentally and unexpectedly.



One trifling circumstance upset his calculations, before he had even

left the staircase. When he reached the landlady's kitchen, the door

of which was open as usual, he glanced cautiously in to see whether,

in Nastasya's absence, the landlady herself was there, or if not,

whether the door to her own room was closed, so that she might not

peep out when he went in for the axe. But what was his amazement when

he suddenly saw that Nastasya was not only at home in the kitchen, but

was occupied there, taking linen out of a basket and hanging it on a

line. Seeing him, she left off hanging the clothes, turned to him and

stared at him all the time he was passing. He turned away his eyes,

and walked past as though he noticed nothing. But it was the end of

everything; he had not the axe! He was overwhelmed.



"What made me think," he reflected, as he went under the gateway,

"what made me think that she would be sure not to be at home at that

moment! Why, why, why did I assume this so certainly?"



He was crushed and even humiliated. He could have laughed at himself

in his anger. . . . A dull animal rage boiled within him.



He stood hesitating in the gateway. To go into the street, to go a

walk for appearance' sake was revolting; to go back to his room, even

more revolting. "And what a chance I have lost for ever!" he muttered,

standing aimlessly in the gateway, just opposite the porter's little

dark room, which was also open. Suddenly he started. From the porter's

room, two paces away from him, something shining under the bench to

the right caught his eye. . . . He looked about him--nobody. He

approached the room on tiptoe, went down two steps into it and in a

faint voice called the porter. "Yes, not at home! Somewhere near

though, in the yard, for the door is wide open." He dashed to the axe

(it was an axe) and pulled it out from under the bench, where it lay

between two chunks of wood; at once, before going out, he made it fast

in the noose, he thrust both hands into his pockets and went out of

the room; no one had noticed him! "When reason fails, the devil

helps!" he thought with a strange grin. This chance raised his spirits

extraordinarily.



He walked along quietly and sedately, without hurry, to avoid

awakening suspicion. He scarcely looked at the passers-by, tried to

escape looking at their faces at all, and to be as little noticeable

as possible. Suddenly he thought of his hat. "Good heavens! I had the

money the day before yesterday and did not get a cap to wear instead!"

A curse rose from the bottom of his soul.



Glancing out of the corner of his eye into a shop, he saw by a clock

on the wall that it was ten minutes past seven. He had to make haste

and at the same time to go someway round, so as to approach the house

from the other side. . . .



When he had happened to imagine all this beforehand, he had sometimes

thought that he would be very much afraid. But he was not very much

afraid now, was not afraid at all, indeed. His mind was even occupied

by irrelevant matters, but by nothing for long. As he passed the

Yusupov garden, he was deeply absorbed in considering the building of

great fountains, and of their refreshing effect on the atmosphere in

all the squares. By degrees he passed to the conviction that if the

summer garden were extended to the field of Mars, and perhaps joined

to the garden of the Mihailovsky Palace, it would be a splendid thing

and a great benefit to the town. Then he was interested by the

question why in all great towns men are not simply driven by

necessity, but in some peculiar way inclined to live in those parts of

the town where there are no gardens nor fountains; where there is most

dirt and smell and all sorts of nastiness. Then his own walks through

the Hay Market came back to his mind, and for a moment he waked up to

reality. "What nonsense!" he thought, "better think of nothing at

all!"



"So probably men led to execution clutch mentally at every object that

meets them on the way," flashed through his mind, but simply flashed,

like lightning; he made haste to dismiss this thought. . . . And by

now he was near; here was the house, here was the gate. Suddenly a

clock somewhere struck once. "What! can it be half-past seven?

Impossible, it must be fast!"



Luckily for him, everything went well again at the gates. At that very

moment, as though expressly for his benefit, a huge waggon of hay had

just driven in at the gate, completely screening him as he passed

under the gateway, and the waggon had scarcely had time to drive

through into the yard, before he had slipped in a flash to the right.

On the other side of the waggon he could hear shouting and

quarrelling; but no one noticed him and no one met him. Many windows

looking into that huge quadrangular yard were open at that moment, but

he did not raise his head--he had not the strength to. The staircase

leading to the old woman's room was close by, just on the right of the

gateway. He was already on the stairs. . . .



Drawing a breath, pressing his hand against his throbbing heart, and

once more feeling for the axe and setting it straight, he began softly

and cautiously ascending the stairs, listening every minute. But the

stairs, too, were quite deserted; all the doors were shut; he met no

one. One flat indeed on the first floor was wide open and painters

were at work in it, but they did not glance at him. He stood still,

thought a minute and went on. "Of course it would be better if they

had not been here, but . . . it's two storeys above them."



And there was the fourth storey, here was the door, here was the flat

opposite, the empty one. The flat underneath the old woman's was

apparently empty also; the visiting card nailed on the door had been

torn off--they had gone away! . . . He was out of breath. For one

instant the thought floated through his mind "Shall I go back?" But he

made no answer and began listening at the old woman's door, a dead

silence. Then he listened again on the staircase, listened long and

intently . . . then looked about him for the last time, pulled himself

together, drew himself up, and once more tried the axe in the noose.

"Am I very pale?" he wondered. "Am I not evidently agitated? She is

mistrustful. . . . Had I better wait a little longer . . . till my

heart leaves off thumping?"



But his heart did not leave off. On the contrary, as though to spite

him, it throbbed more and more violently. He could stand it no longer,

he slowly put out his hand to the bell and rang. Half a minute later

he rang again, more loudly.



No answer. To go on ringing was useless and out of place. The old

woman was, of course, at home, but she was suspicious and alone. He

had some knowledge of her habits . . . and once more he put his ear to

the door. Either his senses were peculiarly keen (which it is

difficult to suppose), or the sound was really very distinct. Anyway,

he suddenly heard something like the cautious touch of a hand on the

lock and the rustle of a skirt at the very door. someone was standing

stealthily close to the lock and just as he was doing on the outside

was secretly listening within, and seemed to have her ear to the door.

. . . He moved a little on purpose and muttered something aloud that

he might not have the appearance of hiding, then rang a third time,

but quietly, soberly, and without impatience, Recalling it afterwards,

that moment stood out in his mind vividly, distinctly, for ever; he

could not make out how he had had such cunning, for his mind was as it

were clouded at moments and he was almost unconscious of his body.

. . . An instant later he heard the latch unfastened.







CHAPTER VII



The door was as before opened a tiny crack, and again two sharp and

suspicious eyes stared at him out of the darkness. Then Raskolnikov

lost his head and nearly made a great mistake.



Fearing the old woman would be frightened by their being alone, and

not hoping that the sight of him would disarm her suspicions, he took

hold of the door and drew it towards him to prevent the old woman from

attempting to shut it again. Seeing this she did not pull the door

back, but she did not let go the handle so that he almost dragged her

out with it on to the stairs. Seeing that she was standing in the

doorway not allowing him to pass, he advanced straight upon her. She

stepped back in alarm, tried to say something, but seemed unable to

speak and stared with open eyes at him.



"Good evening, Alyona Ivanovna," he began, trying to speak easily, but

his voice would not obey him, it broke and shook. "I have come . . . I

have brought something . . . but we'd better come in . . . to the

light. . . ."



And leaving her, he passed straight into the room uninvited. The old

woman ran after him; her tongue was unloosed.



"Good heavens! What it is? Who is it? What do you want?"



"Why, Alyona Ivanovna, you know me . . . Raskolnikov . . . here, I

brought you the pledge I promised the other day . . ." And he held out

the pledge.



The old woman glanced for a moment at the pledge, but at once stared

in the eyes of her uninvited visitor. She looked intently, maliciously

and mistrustfully. A minute passed; he even fancied something like a

sneer in her eyes, as though she had already guessed everything. He

felt that he was losing his head, that he was almost frightened, so

frightened that if she were to look like that and not say a word for

another half minute, he thought he would have run away from her.



"Why do you look at me as though you did not know me?" he said

suddenly, also with malice. "Take it if you like, if not I'll go

elsewhere, I am in a hurry."



He had not even thought of saying this, but it was suddenly said of

itself. The old woman recovered herself, and her visitor's resolute

tone evidently restored her confidence.



"But why, my good sir, all of a minute. . . . What is it?" she asked,

looking at the pledge.



"The silver cigarette case; I spoke of it last time, you know."



She held out her hand.



"But how pale you are, to be sure . . . and your hands are trembling

too? Have you been bathing, or what?"



"Fever," he answered abruptly. "You can't help getting pale . . . if

you've nothing to eat," he added, with difficulty articulating the

words.



His strength was failing him again. But his answer sounded like the

truth; the old woman took the pledge.



"What is it?" she asked once more, scanning Raskolnikov intently, and

weighing the pledge in her hand.



"A thing . . . cigarette case. . . . Silver. . . . Look at it."



"It does not seem somehow like silver. . . . How he has wrapped it up!"



Trying to untie the string and turning to the window, to the light

(all her windows were shut, in spite of the stifling heat), she left

him altogether for some seconds and stood with her back to him. He

unbuttoned his coat and freed the axe from the noose, but did not yet

take it out altogether, simply holding it in his right hand under the

coat. His hands were fearfully weak, he felt them every moment growing

more numb and more wooden. He was afraid he would let the axe slip and

fall. . . . A sudden giddiness came over him.



"But what has he tied it up like this for?" the old woman cried with

vexation and moved towards him.



He had not a minute more to lose. He pulled the axe quite out, swung

it with both arms, scarcely conscious of himself, and almost without

effort, almost mechanically, brought the blunt side down on her head.

He seemed not to use his own strength in this. But as soon as he had

once brought the axe down, his strength returned to him.



The old woman was as always bareheaded. Her thin, light hair, streaked

with grey, thickly smeared with grease, was plaited in a rat's tail

and fastened by a broken horn comb which stood out on the nape of her

neck. As she was so short, the blow fell on the very top of her skull.

She cried out, but very faintly, and suddenly sank all of a heap on

the floor, raising her hands to her head. In one hand she still held

"the pledge." Then he dealt her another and another blow with the

blunt side and on the same spot. The blood gushed as from an

overturned glass, the body fell back. He stepped back, let it fall,

and at once bent over her face; she was dead. Her eyes seemed to be

starting out of their sockets, the brow and the whole face were drawn

and contorted convulsively.



He laid the axe on the ground near the dead body and felt at once in

her pocket (trying to avoid the streaming body)--the same right-hand

pocket from which she had taken the key on his last visit. He was in

full possession of his faculties, free from confusion or giddiness,

but his hands were still trembling. He remembered afterwards that he

had been particularly collected and careful, trying all the time not

to get smeared with blood. . . . He pulled out the keys at once, they

were all, as before, in one bunch on a steel ring. He ran at once into

the bedroom with them. It was a very small room with a whole shrine of

holy images. Against the other wall stood a big bed, very clean and

covered with a silk patchwork wadded quilt. Against a third wall was a

chest of drawers. Strange to say, so soon as he began to fit the keys

into the chest, so soon as he heard their jingling, a convulsive

shudder passed over him. He suddenly felt tempted again to give it all

up and go away. But that was only for an instant; it was too late to

go back. He positively smiled at himself, when suddenly another

terrifying idea occurred to his mind. He suddenly fancied that the old

woman might be still alive and might recover her senses. Leaving the

keys in the chest, he ran back to the body, snatched up the axe and

lifted it once more over the old woman, but did not bring it down.

There was no doubt that she was dead. Bending down and examining her

again more closely, he saw clearly that the skull was broken and even

battered in on one side. He was about to feel it with his finger, but

drew back his hand and indeed it was evident without that. Meanwhile

there was a perfect pool of blood. All at once he noticed a string on

her neck; he tugged at it, but the string was strong and did not snap

and besides, it was soaked with blood. He tried to pull it out from

the front of the dress, but something held it and prevented its

coming. In his impatience he raised the axe again to cut the string

from above on the body, but did not dare, and with difficulty,

smearing his hand and the axe in the blood, after two minutes' hurried

effort, he cut the string and took it off without touching the body

with the axe; he was not mistaken--it was a purse. On the string were

two crosses, one of Cyprus wood and one of copper, and an image in

silver filigree, and with them a small greasy chamois leather purse

with a steel rim and ring. The purse was stuffed very full;

Raskolnikov thrust it in his pocket without looking at it, flung the

crosses on the old woman's body and rushed back into the bedroom, this

time taking the axe with him.



He was in terrible haste, he snatched the keys, and began trying them

again. But he was unsuccessful. They would not fit in the locks. It

was not so much that his hands were shaking, but that he kept making

mistakes; though he saw for instance that a key was not the right one

and would not fit, still he tried to put it in. Suddenly he remembered

and realised that the big key with the deep notches, which was hanging

there with the small keys could not possibly belong to the chest of

drawers (on his last visit this had struck him), but to some strong

box, and that everything perhaps was hidden in that box. He left the

chest of drawers, and at once felt under the bedstead, knowing that

old women usually keep boxes under their beds. And so it was; there

was a good-sized box under the bed, at least a yard in length, with an

arched lid covered with red leather and studded with steel nails. The

notched key fitted at once and unlocked it. At the top, under a white

sheet, was a coat of red brocade lined with hareskin; under it was a

silk dress, then a shawl and it seemed as though there was nothing

below but clothes. The first thing he did was to wipe his blood-

stained hands on the red brocade. "It's red, and on red blood will be

less noticeable," the thought passed through his mind; then he

suddenly came to himself. "Good God, am I going out of my senses?" he

thought with terror.



But no sooner did he touch the clothes than a gold watch slipped from

under the fur coat. He made haste to turn them all over. There turned

out to be various articles made of gold among the clothes--probably

all pledges, unredeemed or waiting to be redeemed--bracelets, chains,

ear-rings, pins and such things. Some were in cases, others simply

wrapped in newspaper, carefully and exactly folded, and tied round

with tape. Without any delay, he began filling up the pockets of his

trousers and overcoat without examining or undoing the parcels and

cases; but he had not time to take many. . . .



He suddenly heard steps in the room where the old woman lay. He

stopped short and was still as death. But all was quiet, so it must

have been his fancy. All at once he heard distinctly a faint cry, as

though someone had uttered a low broken moan. Then again dead silence

for a minute or two. He sat squatting on his heels by the box and

waited holding his breath. Suddenly he jumped up, seized the axe and

ran out of the bedroom.



In the middle of the room stood Lizaveta with a big bundle in her

arms. She was gazing in stupefaction at her murdered sister, white as

a sheet and seeming not to have the strength to cry out. Seeing him

run out of the bedroom, she began faintly quivering all over, like a

leaf, a shudder ran down her face; she lifted her hand, opened her

mouth, but still did not scream. She began slowly backing away from

him into the corner, staring intently, persistently at him, but still

uttered no sound, as though she could not get breath to scream. He

rushed at her with the axe; her mouth twitched piteously, as one sees

babies' mouths, when they begin to be frightened, stare intently at

what frightens them and are on the point of screaming. And this

hapless Lizaveta was so simple and had been so thoroughly crushed and

scared that she did not even raise a hand to guard her face, though

that was the most necessary and natural action at the moment, for the

axe was raised over her face. She only put up her empty left hand, but

not to her face, slowly holding it out before her as though motioning

him away. The axe fell with the sharp edge just on the skull and split

at one blow all the top of the head. She fell heavily at once.

Raskolnikov completely lost his head, snatching up her bundle, dropped

it again and ran into the entry.



Fear gained more and more mastery over him, especially after this

second, quite unexpected murder. He longed to run away from the place

as fast as possible. And if at that moment he had been capable of

seeing and reasoning more correctly, if he had been able to realise

all the difficulties of his position, the hopelessness, the

hideousness and the absurdity of it, if he could have understood how

many obstacles and, perhaps, crimes he had still to overcome or to

commit, to get out of that place and to make his way home, it is very

possible that he would have flung up everything, and would have gone

to give himself up, and not from fear, but from simple horror and

loathing of what he had done. The feeling of loathing especially

surged up within him and grew stronger every minute. He would not now

have gone to the box or even into the room for anything in the world.



But a sort of blankness, even dreaminess, had begun by degrees to take

possession of him; at moments he forgot himself, or rather, forgot

what was of importance, and caught at trifles. Glancing, however, into

the kitchen and seeing a bucket half full of water on a bench, he

bethought him of washing his hands and the axe. His hands were sticky

with blood. He dropped the axe with the blade in the water, snatched a

piece of soap that lay in a broken saucer on the window, and began

washing his hands in the bucket. When they were clean, he took out the

axe, washed the blade and spent a long time, about three minutes,

washing the wood where there were spots of blood rubbing them with

soap. Then he wiped it all with some linen that was hanging to dry on

a line in the kitchen and then he was a long while attentively

examining the axe at the window. There was no trace left on it, only

the wood was still damp. He carefully hung the axe in the noose under

his coat. Then as far as was possible, in the dim light in the

kitchen, he looked over his overcoat, his trousers and his boots. At

the first glance there seemed to be nothing but stains on the boots.

He wetted the rag and rubbed the boots. But he knew he was not looking

thoroughly, that there might be something quite noticeable that he was

overlooking. He stood in the middle of the room, lost in thought. Dark

agonising ideas rose in his mind--the idea that he was mad and that at

that moment he was incapable of reasoning, of protecting himself, that

he ought perhaps to be doing something utterly different from what he

was now doing. "Good God!" he muttered "I must fly, fly," and he

rushed into the entry. But here a shock of terror awaited him such as

he had never known before.



He stood and gazed and could not believe his eyes: the door, the outer

door from the stairs, at which he had not long before waited and rung,

was standing unfastened and at least six inches open. No lock, no

bolt, all the time, all that time! The old woman had not shut it after

him perhaps as a precaution. But, good God! Why, he had seen Lizaveta

afterwards! And how could he, how could he have failed to reflect that

she must have come in somehow! She could not have come through the

wall!



He dashed to the door and fastened the latch.



"But no, the wrong thing again! I must get away, get away. . . ."



He unfastened the latch, opened the door and began listening on the

staircase.



He listened a long time. Somewhere far away, it might be in the

gateway, two voices were loudly and shrilly shouting, quarrelling

and scolding. "What are they about?" He waited patiently. At last

all was still, as though suddenly cut off; they had separated. He

was meaning to go out, but suddenly, on the floor below, a door was

noisily opened and someone began going downstairs humming a tune.

"How is it they all make such a noise?" flashed through his mind. Once

more he closed the door and waited. At last all was still, not a

soul stirring. He was just taking a step towards the stairs when he

heard fresh footsteps.



The steps sounded very far off, at the very bottom of the stairs, but

he remembered quite clearly and distinctly that from the first sound

he began for some reason to suspect that this was someone coming

/there/, to the fourth floor, to the old woman. Why? Were the sounds

somehow peculiar, significant? The steps were heavy, even and

unhurried. Now /he/ had passed the first floor, now he was mounting

higher, it was growing more and more distinct! He could hear his heavy

breathing. And now the third storey had been reached. Coming here! And

it seemed to him all at once that he was turned to stone, that it was

like a dream in which one is being pursued, nearly caught and will be

killed, and is rooted to the spot and cannot even move one's arms.



At last when the unknown was mounting to the fourth floor, he suddenly

started, and succeeded in slipping neatly and quickly back into the

flat and closing the door behind him. Then he took the hook and

softly, noiselessly, fixed it in the catch. Instinct helped him. When

he had done this, he crouched holding his breath, by the door. The

unknown visitor was by now also at the door. They were now standing

opposite one another, as he had just before been standing with the old

woman, when the door divided them and he was listening.



The visitor panted several times. "He must be a big, fat man," thought

Raskolnikov, squeezing the axe in his hand. It seemed like a dream

indeed. The visitor took hold of the bell and rang it loudly.



As soon as the tin bell tinkled, Raskolnikov seemed to be aware of

something moving in the room. For some seconds he listened quite

seriously. The unknown rang again, waited and suddenly tugged

violently and impatiently at the handle of the door. Raskolnikov gazed

in horror at the hook shaking in its fastening, and in blank terror

expected every minute that the fastening would be pulled out. It

certainly did seem possible, so violently was he shaking it. He was

tempted to hold the fastening, but /he/ might be aware of it. A

giddiness came over him again. "I shall fall down!" flashed through

his mind, but the unknown began to speak and he recovered himself at

once.



"What's up? Are they asleep or murdered? D-damn them!" he bawled in a

thick voice, "Hey, Alyona Ivanovna, old witch! Lizaveta Ivanovna, hey,

my beauty! open the door! Oh, damn them! Are they asleep or what?"



And again, enraged, he tugged with all his might a dozen times at the

bell. He must certainly be a man of authority and an intimate

acquaintance.



At this moment light hurried steps were heard not far off, on the

stairs. someone else was approaching. Raskolnikov had not heard them

at first.



"You don't say there's no one at home," the new-comer cried in a

cheerful, ringing voice, addressing the first visitor, who still went

on pulling the bell. "Good evening, Koch."



"From his voice he must be quite young," thought Raskolnikov.



"Who the devil can tell? I've almost broken the lock," answered Koch.

"But how do you come to know me?



"Why! The day before yesterday I beat you three times running at

billiards at Gambrinus'."



"Oh!"



"So they are not at home? That's queer. It's awfully stupid though.

Where could the old woman have gone? I've come on business."



"Yes; and I have business with her, too."



"Well, what can we do? Go back, I suppose, Aie--aie! And I was hoping

to get some money!" cried the young man.



"We must give it up, of course, but what did she fix this time for?

The old witch fixed the time for me to come herself. It's out of my

way. And where the devil she can have got to, I can't make out. She

sits here from year's end to year's end, the old hag; her legs are bad

and yet here all of a sudden she is out for a walk!"



"Hadn't we better ask the porter?"



"What?"



"Where she's gone and when she'll be back."



"Hm. . . . Damn it all! . . . We might ask. . . . But you know she

never does go anywhere."



And he once more tugged at the door-handle.



"Damn it all. There's nothing to be done, we must go!"



"Stay!" cried the young man suddenly. "Do you see how the door shakes

if you pull it?"



"Well?"



"That shows it's not locked, but fastened with the hook! Do you hear

how the hook clanks?"



"Well?"



"Why, don't you see? That proves that one of them is at home. If they

were all out, they would have locked the door from the outside with

the key and not with the hook from inside. There, do you hear how the

hook is clanking? To fasten the hook on the inside they must be at

home, don't you see. So there they are sitting inside and don't open

the door!"



"Well! And so they must be!" cried Koch, astonished. "What are they

about in there?" And he began furiously shaking the door.



"Stay!" cried the young man again. "Don't pull at it! There must be

something wrong. . . . Here, you've been ringing and pulling at the

door and still they don't open! So either they've both fainted

or . . ."



"What?"



"I tell you what. Let's go fetch the porter, let him wake them up."



"All right."



Both were going down.



"Stay. You stop here while I run down for the porter."



"What for?"



"Well, you'd better."



"All right."



"I'm studying the law you see! It's evident, e-vi-dent there's

something wrong here!" the young man cried hotly, and he ran

downstairs.



Koch remained. Once more he softly touched the bell which gave one

tinkle, then gently, as though reflecting and looking about him, began

touching the door-handle pulling it and letting it go to make sure

once more that it was only fastened by the hook. Then puffing and

panting he bent down and began looking at the keyhole: but the key was

in the lock on the inside and so nothing could be seen.



Raskolnikov stood keeping tight hold of the axe. He was in a sort of

delirium. He was even making ready to fight when they should come in.

While they were knocking and talking together, the idea several times

occurred to him to end it all at once and shout to them through the

door. Now and then he was tempted to swear at them, to jeer at them,

while they could not open the door! "Only make haste!" was the thought

that flashed through his mind.



"But what the devil is he about? . . ." Time was passing, one minute,

and another--no one came. Koch began to be restless.



"What the devil?" he cried suddenly and in impatience deserting his

sentry duty, he, too, went down, hurrying and thumping with his heavy

boots on the stairs. The steps died away.



"Good heavens! What am I to do?"



Raskolnikov unfastened the hook, opened the door--there was no sound.

Abruptly, without any thought at all, he went out, closing the door as

thoroughly as he could, and went downstairs.



He had gone down three flights when he suddenly heard a loud voice

below--where could he go! There was nowhere to hide. He was just going

back to the flat.



"Hey there! Catch the brute!"



Somebody dashed out of a flat below, shouting, and rather fell than

ran down the stairs, bawling at the top of his voice.



"Mitka! Mitka! Mitka! Mitka! Mitka! Blast him!"



The shout ended in a shriek; the last sounds came from the yard; all

was still. But at the same instant several men talking loud and fast

began noisily mounting the stairs. There were three or four of them.

He distinguished the ringing voice of the young man. "They!"



Filled with despair he went straight to meet them, feeling "come what

must!" If they stopped him--all was lost; if they let him pass--all

was lost too; they would remember him. They were approaching; they

were only a flight from him--and suddenly deliverance! A few steps

from him on the right, there was an empty flat with the door wide

open, the flat on the second floor where the painters had been at

work, and which, as though for his benefit, they had just left. It was

they, no doubt, who had just run down, shouting. The floor had only

just been painted, in the middle of the room stood a pail and a broken

pot with paint and brushes. In one instant he had whisked in at the

open door and hidden behind the wall and only in the nick of time;

they had already reached the landing. Then they turned and went on up

to the fourth floor, talking loudly. He waited, went out on tiptoe and

ran down the stairs.



No one was on the stairs, nor in the gateway. He passed quickly

through the gateway and turned to the left in the street.



He knew, he knew perfectly well that at that moment they were at the

flat, that they were greatly astonished at finding it unlocked, as the

door had just been fastened, that by now they were looking at the

bodies, that before another minute had passed they would guess and

completely realise that the murderer had just been there, and had

succeeded in hiding somewhere, slipping by them and escaping. They

would guess most likely that he had been in the empty flat, while they

were going upstairs. And meanwhile he dared not quicken his pace much,

though the next turning was still nearly a hundred yards away. "Should

he slip through some gateway and wait somewhere in an unknown street?

No, hopeless! Should he fling away the axe? Should he take a cab?

Hopeless, hopeless!"



At last he reached the turning. He turned down it more dead than

alive. Here he was half way to safety, and he understood it; it was

less risky because there was a great crowd of people, and he was lost

in it like a grain of sand. But all he had suffered had so weakened

him that he could scarcely move. Perspiration ran down him in drops,

his neck was all wet. "My word, he has been going it!" someone

shouted at him when he came out on the canal bank.



He was only dimly conscious of himself now, and the farther he went

the worse it was. He remembered however, that on coming out on to the

canal bank, he was alarmed at finding few people there and so being

more conspicuous, and he had thought of turning back. Though he was

almost falling from fatigue, he went a long way round so as to get

home from quite a different direction.



He was not fully conscious when he passed through the gateway of his

house! he was already on the staircase before he recollected the axe.

And yet he had a very grave problem before him, to put it back and to

escape observation as far as possible in doing so. He was of course

incapable of reflecting that it might perhaps be far better not to

restore the axe at all, but to drop it later on in somebody's yard.

But it all happened fortunately, the door of the porter's room was

closed but not locked, so that it seemed most likely that the porter

was at home. But he had so completely lost all power of reflection

that he walked straight to the door and opened it. If the porter had

asked him, "What do you want?" he would perhaps have simply handed him

the axe. But again the porter was not at home, and he succeeded in

putting the axe back under the bench, and even covering it with the

chunk of wood as before. He met no one, not a soul, afterwards on the

way to his room; the landlady's door was shut. When he was in his

room, he flung himself on the sofa just as he was--he did not sleep,

but sank into blank forgetfulness. If anyone had come into his room

then, he would have jumped up at once and screamed. Scraps and shreds

of thoughts were simply swarming in his brain, but he could not catch

at one, he could not rest on one, in spite of all his efforts. . . .









PART II







CHAPTER I



So he lay a very long while. Now and then he seemed to wake up, and at

such moments he noticed that it was far into the night, but it did not

occur to him to get up. At last he noticed that it was beginning to

get light. He was lying on his back, still dazed from his recent

oblivion. Fearful, despairing cries rose shrilly from the street,

sounds which he heard every night, indeed, under his window after two

o'clock. They woke him up now.



"Ah! the drunken men are coming out of the taverns," he thought, "it's

past two o'clock," and at once he leaped up, as though someone had

pulled him from the sofa.



"What! Past two o'clock!"



He sat down on the sofa--and instantly recollected everything! All at

once, in one flash, he recollected everything.



For the first moment he thought he was going mad. A dreadful chill

came over him; but the chill was from the fever that had begun long

before in his sleep. Now he was suddenly taken with violent shivering,

so that his teeth chattered and all his limbs were shaking. He opened

the door and began listening--everything in the house was asleep. With

amazement he gazed at himself and everything in the room around him,

wondering how he could have come in the night before without fastening

the door, and have flung himself on the sofa without undressing,

without even taking his hat off. It had fallen off and was lying on

the floor near his pillow.



"If anyone had come in, what would he have thought? That I'm drunk

but . . ."



He rushed to the window. There was light enough, and he began

hurriedly looking himself all over from head to foot, all his clothes;

were there no traces? But there was no doing it like that; shivering

with cold, he began taking off everything and looking over again. He

turned everything over to the last threads and rags, and mistrusting

himself, went through his search three times.



But there seemed to be nothing, no trace, except in one place, where

some thick drops of congealed blood were clinging to the frayed edge

of his trousers. He picked up a big claspknife and cut off the frayed

threads. There seemed to be nothing more.



Suddenly he remembered that the purse and the things he had taken out

of the old woman's box were still in his pockets! He had not thought

till then of taking them out and hiding them! He had not even thought

of them while he was examining his clothes! What next? Instantly he

rushed to take them out and fling them on the table. When he had

pulled out everything, and turned the pocket inside out to be sure

there was nothing left, he carried the whole heap to the corner. The

paper had come off the bottom of the wall and hung there in tatters.

He began stuffing all the things into the hole under the paper:

"They're in! All out of sight, and the purse too!" he thought

gleefully, getting up and gazing blankly at the hole which bulged out

more than ever. Suddenly he shuddered all over with horror; "My God!"

he whispered in despair: "what's the matter with me? Is that hidden?

Is that the way to hide things?"



He had not reckoned on having trinkets to hide. He had only thought of

money, and so had not prepared a hiding-place.



"But now, now, what am I glad of?" he thought, "Is that hiding things?

My reason's deserting me--simply!"



He sat down on the sofa in exhaustion and was at once shaken by

another unbearable fit of shivering. Mechanically he drew from a chair

beside him his old student's winter coat, which was still warm though

almost in rags, covered himself up with it and once more sank into

drowsiness and delirium. He lost consciousness.



Not more than five minutes had passed when he jumped up a second time,

and at once pounced in a frenzy on his clothes again.



"How could I go to sleep again with nothing done? Yes, yes; I have not

taken the loop off the armhole! I forgot it, forgot a thing like that!

Such a piece of evidence!"



He pulled off the noose, hurriedly cut it to pieces and threw the bits

among his linen under the pillow.



"Pieces of torn linen couldn't rouse suspicion, whatever happened; I

think not, I think not, any way!" he repeated, standing in the middle

of the room, and with painful concentration he fell to gazing about

him again, at the floor and everywhere, trying to make sure he had not

forgotten anything. The conviction that all his faculties, even

memory, and the simplest power of reflection were failing him, began

to be an insufferable torture.



"Surely it isn't beginning already! Surely it isn't my punishment

coming upon me? It is!"



The frayed rags he had cut off his trousers were actually lying on the

floor in the middle of the room, where anyone coming in would see

them!



"What is the matter with me!" he cried again, like one distraught.



Then a strange idea entered his head; that, perhaps, all his clothes

were covered with blood, that, perhaps, there were a great many

stains, but that he did not see them, did not notice them because his

perceptions were failing, were going to pieces . . . his reason was

clouded. . . . Suddenly he remembered that there had been blood on the

purse too. "Ah! Then there must be blood on the pocket too, for I put

the wet purse in my pocket!"



In a flash he had turned the pocket inside out and, yes!--there were

traces, stains on the lining of the pocket!



"So my reason has not quite deserted me, so I still have some sense

and memory, since I guessed it of myself," he thought triumphantly,

with a deep sigh of relief; "it's simply the weakness of fever, a

moment's delirium," and he tore the whole lining out of the left

pocket of his trousers. At that instant the sunlight fell on his left

boot; on the sock which poked out from the boot, he fancied there were

traces! He flung off his boots; "traces indeed! The tip of the sock

was soaked with blood;" he must have unwarily stepped into that pool.

. . . "But what am I to do with this now? Where am I to put the sock

and rags and pocket?"



He gathered them all up in his hands and stood in the middle of the

room.



"In the stove? But they would ransack the stove first of all. Burn

them? But what can I burn them with? There are no matches even. No,

better go out and throw it all away somewhere. Yes, better throw it

away," he repeated, sitting down on the sofa again, "and at once, this

minute, without lingering . . ."



But his head sank on the pillow instead. Again the unbearable icy

shivering came over him; again he drew his coat over him.



And for a long while, for some hours, he was haunted by the impulse to

"go off somewhere at once, this moment, and fling it all away, so that

it may be out of sight and done with, at once, at once!" Several times

he tried to rise from the sofa, but could not.



He was thoroughly waked up at last by a violent knocking at his door.



"Open, do, are you dead or alive? He keeps sleeping here!" shouted

Nastasya, banging with her fist on the door. "For whole days

together he's snoring here like a dog! A dog he is too. Open I tell

you. It's past ten."



"Maybe he's not at home," said a man's voice.



"Ha! that's the porter's voice. . . . What does he want?"



He jumped up and sat on the sofa. The beating of his heart was a

positive pain.



"Then who can have latched the door?" retorted Nastasya. "He's taken

to bolting himself in! As if he were worth stealing! Open, you stupid,

wake up!"



"What do they want? Why the porter? All's discovered. Resist or open?

Come what may! . . ."



He half rose, stooped forward and unlatched the door.



His room was so small that he could undo the latch without leaving the

bed. Yes; the porter and Nastasya were standing there.



Nastasya stared at him in a strange way. He glanced with a defiant and

desperate air at the porter, who without a word held out a grey folded

paper sealed with bottle-wax.



"A notice from the office," he announced, as he gave him the paper.



"From what office?"



"A summons to the police office, of course. You know which office."



"To the police? . . . What for? . . ."



"How can I tell? You're sent for, so you go."



The man looked at him attentively, looked round the room and turned to

go away.



"He's downright ill!" observed Nastasya, not taking her eyes off him.

The porter turned his head for a moment. "He's been in a fever since

yesterday," she added.



Raskolnikov made no response and held the paper in his hands, without

opening it. "Don't you get up then," Nastasya went on compassionately,

seeing that he was letting his feet down from the sofa. "You're ill,

and so don't go; there's no such hurry. What have you got there?"



He looked; in his right hand he held the shreds he had cut from his

trousers, the sock, and the rags of the pocket. So he had been asleep

with them in his hand. Afterwards reflecting upon it, he remembered

that half waking up in his fever, he had grasped all this tightly in

his hand and so fallen asleep again.



"Look at the rags he's collected and sleeps with them, as though he

has got hold of a treasure . . ."



And Nastasya went off into her hysterical giggle.



Instantly he thrust them all under his great coat and fixed his eyes

intently upon her. Far as he was from being capable of rational

reflection at that moment, he felt that no one would behave like that

with a person who was going to be arrested. "But . . . the police?"



"You'd better have some tea! Yes? I'll bring it, there's some left."



"No . . . I'm going; I'll go at once," he muttered, getting on to his

feet.



"Why, you'll never get downstairs!"



"Yes, I'll go."



"As you please."



She followed the porter out.



At once he rushed to the light to examine the sock and the rags.



"There are stains, but not very noticeable; all covered with dirt, and

rubbed and already discoloured. No one who had no suspicion could

distinguish anything. Nastasya from a distance could not have noticed,

thank God!" Then with a tremor he broke the seal of the notice and

began reading; he was a long while reading, before he understood. It

was an ordinary summons from the district police-station to appear

that day at half-past nine at the office of the district

superintendent.



"But when has such a thing happened? I never have anything to do with

the police! And why just to-day?" he thought in agonising

bewilderment. "Good God, only get it over soon!"



He was flinging himself on his knees to pray, but broke into laughter

--not at the idea of prayer, but at himself.



He began, hurriedly dressing. "If I'm lost, I am lost, I don't care!

Shall I put the sock on?" he suddenly wondered, "it will get dustier

still and the traces will be gone."



But no sooner had he put it on than he pulled it off again in loathing

and horror. He pulled it off, but reflecting that he had no other

socks, he picked it up and put it on again--and again he laughed.



"That's all conventional, that's all relative, merely a way of looking

at it," he thought in a flash, but only on the top surface of his

mind, while he was shuddering all over, "there, I've got it on! I have

finished by getting it on!"



But his laughter was quickly followed by despair.



"No, it's too much for me . . ." he thought. His legs shook. "From

fear," he muttered. His head swam and ached with fever. "It's a trick!

They want to decoy me there and confound me over everything," he

mused, as he went out on to the stairs--"the worst of it is I'm almost

light-headed . . . I may blurt out something stupid . . ."



On the stairs he remembered that he was leaving all the things just as

they were in the hole in the wall, "and very likely, it's on purpose

to search when I'm out," he thought, and stopped short. But he was

possessed by such despair, such cynicism of misery, if one may so call

it, that with a wave of his hand he went on. "Only to get it over!"



In the street the heat was insufferable again; not a drop of rain had

fallen all those days. Again dust, bricks and mortar, again the stench

from the shops and pot-houses, again the drunken men, the Finnish

pedlars and half-broken-down cabs. The sun shone straight in his eyes,

so that it hurt him to look out of them, and he felt his head going

round--as a man in a fever is apt to feel when he comes out into the

street on a bright sunny day.



When he reached the turning into /the/ street, in an agony of

trepidation he looked down it . . . at /the/ house . . . and at once

averted his eyes.



"If they question me, perhaps I'll simply tell," he thought, as he

drew near the police-station.



The police-station was about a quarter of a mile off. It had lately

been moved to new rooms on the fourth floor of a new house. He had

been once for a moment in the old office but long ago. Turning in at

the gateway, he saw on the right a flight of stairs which a peasant

was mounting with a book in his hand. "A house-porter, no doubt; so

then, the office is here," and he began ascending the stairs on the

chance. He did not want to ask questions of anyone.



"I'll go in, fall on my knees, and confess everything . . ." he

thought, as he reached the fourth floor.



The staircase was steep, narrow and all sloppy with dirty water. The

kitchens of the flats opened on to the stairs and stood open almost

the whole day. So there was a fearful smell and heat. The staircase

was crowded with porters going up and down with their books under

their arms, policemen, and persons of all sorts and both sexes. The

door of the office, too, stood wide open. Peasants stood waiting

within. There, too, the heat was stifling and there was a sickening

smell of fresh paint and stale oil from the newly decorated rooms.



After waiting a little, he decided to move forward into the next room.

All the rooms were small and low-pitched. A fearful impatience drew

him on and on. No one paid attention to him. In the second room some

clerks sat writing, dressed hardly better than he was, and rather a

queer-looking set. He went up to one of them.



"What is it?"



He showed the notice he had received.



"You are a student?" the man asked, glancing at the notice.



"Yes, formerly a student."



The clerk looked at him, but without the slightest interest. He was a

particularly unkempt person with the look of a fixed idea in his eye.



"There would be no getting anything out of him, because he has no

interest in anything," thought Raskolnikov.



"Go in there to the head clerk," said the clerk, pointing towards the

furthest room.



He went into that room--the fourth in order; it was a small room and

packed full of people, rather better dressed than in the outer rooms.

Among them were two ladies. One, poorly dressed in mourning, sat at

the table opposite the chief clerk, writing something at his

dictation. The other, a very stout, buxom woman with a purplish-red,

blotchy face, excessively smartly dressed with a brooch on her bosom

as big as a saucer, was standing on one side, apparently waiting for

something. Raskolnikov thrust his notice upon the head clerk. The

latter glanced at it, said: "Wait a minute," and went on attending to

the lady in mourning.



He breathed more freely. "It can't be that!"



By degrees he began to regain confidence, he kept urging himself to

have courage and be calm.



"Some foolishness, some trifling carelessness, and I may betray

myself! Hm . . . it's a pity there's no air here," he added, "it's

stifling. . . . It makes one's head dizzier than ever . . . and one's

mind too . . ."



He was conscious of a terrible inner turmoil. He was afraid of losing

his self-control; he tried to catch at something and fix his mind on

it, something quite irrelevant, but he could not succeed in this at

all. Yet the head clerk greatly interested him, he kept hoping to see

through him and guess something from his face.



He was a very young man, about two and twenty, with a dark mobile face

that looked older than his years. He was fashionably dressed and

foppish, with his hair parted in the middle, well combed and pomaded,

and wore a number of rings on his well-scrubbed fingers and a gold

chain on his waistcoat. He said a couple of words in French to a

foreigner who was in the room, and said them fairly correctly.



"Luise Ivanovna, you can sit down," he said casually to the gaily-

dressed, purple-faced lady, who was still standing as though not

venturing to sit down, though there was a chair beside her.



"Ich danke," said the latter, and softly, with a rustle of silk she

sank into the chair. Her light blue dress trimmed with white lace

floated about the table like an air-balloon and filled almost half the

room. She smelt of scent. But she was obviously embarrassed at filling

half the room and smelling so strongly of scent; and though her smile

was impudent as well as cringing, it betrayed evident uneasiness.



The lady in mourning had done at last, and got up. All at once, with

some noise, an officer walked in very jauntily, with a peculiar swing

of his shoulders at each step. He tossed his cockaded cap on the table

and sat down in an easy-chair. The small lady positively skipped from

her seat on seeing him, and fell to curtsying in a sort of ecstasy;

but the officer took not the smallest notice of her, and she did not

venture to sit down again in his presence. He was the assistant

superintendent. He had a reddish moustache that stood out horizontally

on each side of his face, and extremely small features, expressive of

nothing much except a certain insolence. He looked askance and rather

indignantly at Raskolnikov; he was so very badly dressed, and in spite

of his humiliating position, his bearing was by no means in keeping

with his clothes. Raskolnikov had unwarily fixed a very long and

direct look on him, so that he felt positively affronted.



"What do you want?" he shouted, apparently astonished that such a

ragged fellow was not annihilated by the majesty of his glance.



"I was summoned . . . by a notice . . ." Raskolnikov faltered.



"For the recovery of money due, from /the student/," the head clerk

interfered hurriedly, tearing himself from his papers. "Here!" and he

flung Raskolnikov a document and pointed out the place. "Read that!"



"Money? What money?" thought Raskolnikov, "but . . . then . . . it's

certainly not /that/."



And he trembled with joy. He felt sudden intense indescribable relief.

A load was lifted from his back.



"And pray, what time were you directed to appear, sir?" shouted the

assistant superintendent, seeming for some unknown reason more and

more aggrieved. "You are told to come at nine, and now it's twelve!"



"The notice was only brought me a quarter of an hour ago," Raskolnikov

answered loudly over his shoulder. To his own surprise he, too, grew

suddenly angry and found a certain pleasure in it. "And it's enough

that I have come here ill with fever."



"Kindly refrain from shouting!"



"I'm not shouting, I'm speaking very quietly, it's you who are

shouting at me. I'm a student, and allow no one to shout at me."



The assistant superintendent was so furious that for the first minute

he could only splutter inarticulately. He leaped up from his seat.



"Be silent! You are in a government office. Don't be impudent, sir!"



"You're in a government office, too," cried Raskolnikov, "and you're

smoking a cigarette as well as shouting, so you are showing disrespect

to all of us."



He felt an indescribable satisfaction at having said this.



The head clerk looked at him with a smile. The angry assistant

superintendent was obviously disconcerted.



"That's not your business!" he shouted at last with unnatural

loudness. "Kindly make the declaration demanded of you. Show him.

Alexandr Grigorievitch. There is a complaint against you! You don't

pay your debts! You're a fine bird!"



But Raskolnikov was not listening now; he had eagerly clutched at the

paper, in haste to find an explanation. He read it once, and a second

time, and still did not understand.



"What is this?" he asked the head clerk.



"It is for the recovery of money on an I O U, a writ. You must either

pay it, with all expenses, costs and so on, or give a written

declaration when you can pay it, and at the same time an undertaking

not to leave the capital without payment, and nor to sell or conceal

your property. The creditor is at liberty to sell your property, and

proceed against you according to the law."



"But I . . . am not in debt to anyone!"



"That's not our business. Here, an I O U for a hundred and fifteen

roubles, legally attested, and due for payment, has been brought us

for recovery, given by you to the widow of the assessor Zarnitsyn,

nine months ago, and paid over by the widow Zarnitsyn to one Mr.

Tchebarov. We therefore summon you, hereupon."



"But she is my landlady!"



"And what if she is your landlady?"



The head clerk looked at him with a condescending smile of compassion,

and at the same time with a certain triumph, as at a novice under fire

for the first time--as though he would say: "Well, how do you feel

now?" But what did he care now for an I O U, for a writ of recovery!

Was that worth worrying about now, was it worth attention even! He

stood, he read, he listened, he answered, he even asked questions

himself, but all mechanically. The triumphant sense of security, of

deliverance from overwhelming danger, that was what filled his whole

soul that moment without thought for the future, without analysis,

without suppositions or surmises, without doubts and without

questioning. It was an instant of full, direct, purely instinctive

joy. But at that very moment something like a thunderstorm took place

in the office. The assistant superintendent, still shaken by

Raskolnikov's disrespect, still fuming and obviously anxious to keep

up his wounded dignity, pounced on the unfortunate smart lady, who had

been gazing at him ever since he came in with an exceedingly silly

smile.



"You shameful hussy!" he shouted suddenly at the top of his voice.

(The lady in mourning had left the office.) "What was going on at your

house last night? Eh! A disgrace again, you're a scandal to the whole

street. Fighting and drinking again. Do you want the house of

correction? Why, I have warned you ten times over that I would not let

you off the eleventh! And here you are again, again, you . . .

you . . . !"



The paper fell out of Raskolnikov's hands, and he looked wildly at the

smart lady who was so unceremoniously treated. But he soon saw what it

meant, and at once began to find positive amusement in the scandal. He

listened with pleasure, so that he longed to laugh and laugh . . . all

his nerves were on edge.



"Ilya Petrovitch!" the head clerk was beginning anxiously, but stopped

short, for he knew from experience that the enraged assistant could

not be stopped except by force.



As for the smart lady, at first she positively trembled before the

storm. But, strange to say, the more numerous and violent the terms of

abuse became, the more amiable she looked, and the more seductive the

smiles she lavished on the terrible assistant. She moved uneasily, and

curtsied incessantly, waiting impatiently for a chance of putting in

her word: and at last she found it.



"There was no sort of noise or fighting in my house, Mr. Captain," she

pattered all at once, like peas dropping, speaking Russian

confidently, though with a strong German accent, "and no sort of

scandal, and his honour came drunk, and it's the whole truth I am

telling, Mr. Captain, and I am not to blame. . . . Mine is an

honourable house, Mr. Captain, and honourable behaviour, Mr. Captain,

and I always, always dislike any scandal myself. But he came quite

tipsy, and asked for three bottles again, and then he lifted up one

leg, and began playing the pianoforte with one foot, and that is not

at all right in an honourable house, and he /ganz/ broke the piano,

and it was very bad manners indeed and I said so. And he took up a

bottle and began hitting everyone with it. And then I called the

porter, and Karl came, and he took Karl and hit him in the eye; and he

hit Henriette in the eye, too, and gave me five slaps on the cheek.

And it was so ungentlemanly in an honourable house, Mr. Captain, and I

screamed. And he opened the window over the canal, and stood in the

window, squealing like a little pig; it was a disgrace. The idea of

squealing like a little pig at the window into the street! Fie upon

him! And Karl pulled him away from the window by his coat, and it is

true, Mr. Captain, he tore /sein rock/. And then he shouted that /man

muss/ pay him fifteen roubles damages. And I did pay him, Mr. Captain,

five roubles for /sein rock/. And he is an ungentlemanly visitor and

caused all the scandal. 'I will show you up,' he said, 'for I can

write to all the papers about you.'"



"Then he was an author?"



"Yes, Mr. Captain, and what an ungentlemanly visitor in an honourable

house. . . ."



"Now then! Enough! I have told you already . . ."



"Ilya Petrovitch!" the head clerk repeated significantly.



The assistant glanced rapidly at him; the head clerk slightly shook

his head.



". . . So I tell you this, most respectable Luise Ivanovna, and I tell

it you for the last time," the assistant went on. "If there is a

scandal in your honourable house once again, I will put you yourself

in the lock-up, as it is called in polite society. Do you hear? So a

literary man, an author took five roubles for his coat-tail in an

'honourable house'? A nice set, these authors!"



And he cast a contemptuous glance at Raskolnikov. "There was a scandal

the other day in a restaurant, too. An author had eaten his dinner and

would not pay; 'I'll write a satire on you,' says he. And there was

another of them on a steamer last week used the most disgraceful

language to the respectable family of a civil councillor, his wife and

daughter. And there was one of them turned out of a confectioner's

shop the other day. They are like that, authors, literary men,

students, town-criers. . . . Pfoo! You get along! I shall look in upon

you myself one day. Then you had better be careful! Do you hear?"



With hurried deference, Luise Ivanovna fell to curtsying in all

directions, and so curtsied herself to the door. But at the door, she

stumbled backwards against a good-looking officer with a fresh, open

face and splendid thick fair whiskers. This was the superintendent of

the district himself, Nikodim Fomitch. Luise Ivanovna made haste to

curtsy almost to the ground, and with mincing little steps, she

fluttered out of the office.



"Again thunder and lightning--a hurricane!" said Nikodim Fomitch to

Ilya Petrovitch in a civil and friendly tone. "You are aroused again,

you are fuming again! I heard it on the stairs!"



"Well, what then!" Ilya Petrovitch drawled with gentlemanly

nonchalance; and he walked with some papers to another table, with a

jaunty swing of his shoulders at each step. "Here, if you will kindly

look: an author, or a student, has been one at least, does not pay his

debts, has given an I O U, won't clear out of his room, and complaints

are constantly being lodged against him, and here he has been pleased

to make a protest against my smoking in his presence! He behaves like

a cad himself, and just look at him, please. Here's the gentleman, and

very attractive he is!"



"Poverty is not a vice, my friend, but we know you go off like powder,

you can't bear a slight, I daresay you took offence at something and

went too far yourself," continued Nikodim Fomitch, turning affably to

Raskolnikov. "But you were wrong there; he is a capital fellow, I

assure you, but explosive, explosive! He gets hot, fires up, boils

over, and no stopping him! And then it's all over! And at the bottom

he's a heart of gold! His nickname in the regiment was the Explosive

Lieutenant. . . ."



"And what a regiment it was, too," cried Ilya Petrovitch, much

gratified at this agreeable banter, though still sulky.



Raskolnikov had a sudden desire to say something exceptionally

pleasant to them all. "Excuse me, Captain," he began easily, suddenly

addressing Nikodim Fomitch, "will you enter into my position? . . . I

am ready to ask pardon, if I have been ill-mannered. I am a poor

student, sick and shattered (shattered was the word he used) by

poverty. I am not studying, because I cannot keep myself now, but I

shall get money. . . . I have a mother and sister in the province of

X. They will send it to me, and I will pay. My landlady is a good-

hearted woman, but she is so exasperated at my having lost my lessons,

and not paying her for the last four months, that she does not even

send up my dinner . . . and I don't understand this I O U at all. She

is asking me to pay her on this I O U. How am I to pay her? Judge for

yourselves! . . ."



"But that is not our business, you know," the head clerk was

observing.



"Yes, yes. I perfectly agree with you. But allow me to explain . . ."

Raskolnikov put in again, still addressing Nikodim Fomitch, but trying

his best to address Ilya Petrovitch also, though the latter

persistently appeared to be rummaging among his papers and to be

contemptuously oblivious of him. "Allow me to explain that I have been

living with her for nearly three years and at first . . . at first

. . . for why should I not confess it, at the very beginning I

promised to marry her daughter, it was a verbal promise, freely given

. . . she was a girl . . . indeed, I liked her, though I was not in

love with her . . . a youthful affair in fact . . . that is, I mean to

say, that my landlady gave me credit freely in those days, and I led a

life of . . . I was very heedless . . ."



"Nobody asks you for these personal details, sir, we've no time to

waste," Ilya Petrovitch interposed roughly and with a note of triumph;

but Raskolnikov stopped him hotly, though he suddenly found it

exceedingly difficult to speak.



"But excuse me, excuse me. It is for me to explain . . . how it all

happened . . . In my turn . . . though I agree with you . . . it is

unnecessary. But a year ago, the girl died of typhus. I remained

lodging there as before, and when my landlady moved into her present

quarters, she said to me . . . and in a friendly way . . . that she

had complete trust in me, but still, would I not give her an I O U for

one hundred and fifteen roubles, all the debt I owed her. She said if

only I gave her that, she would trust me again, as much as I liked,

and that she would never, never--those were her own words--make use of

that I O U till I could pay of myself . . . and now, when I have lost

my lessons and have nothing to eat, she takes action against me. What

am I to say to that?"



"All these affecting details are no business of ours." Ilya Petrovitch

interrupted rudely. "You must give a written undertaking but as for

your love affairs and all these tragic events, we have nothing to do

with that."



"Come now . . . you are harsh," muttered Nikodim Fomitch, sitting down

at the table and also beginning to write. He looked a little ashamed.



"Write!" said the head clerk to Raskolnikov.



"Write what?" the latter asked, gruffly.



"I will dictate to you."



Raskolnikov fancied that the head clerk treated him more casually and

contemptuously after his speech, but strange to say he suddenly felt

completely indifferent to anyone's opinion, and this revulsion took

place in a flash, in one instant. If he had cared to think a little,

he would have been amazed indeed that he could have talked to them

like that a minute before, forcing his feelings upon them. And where

had those feelings come from? Now if the whole room had been filled,

not with police officers, but with those nearest and dearest to him,

he would not have found one human word for them, so empty was his

heart. A gloomy sensation of agonising, everlasting solitude and

remoteness, took conscious form in his soul. It was not the meanness

of his sentimental effusions before Ilya Petrovitch, nor the meanness

of the latter's triumph over him that had caused this sudden revulsion

in his heart. Oh, what had he to do now with his own baseness, with

all these petty vanities, officers, German women, debts, police-

offices? If he had been sentenced to be burnt at that moment, he would

not have stirred, would hardly have heard the sentence to the end.

Something was happening to him entirely new, sudden and unknown. It

was not that he understood, but he felt clearly with all the intensity

of sensation that he could never more appeal to these people in the

police-office with sentimental effusions like his recent outburst, or

with anything whatever; and that if they had been his own brothers and

sisters and not police-officers, it would have been utterly out of the

question to appeal to them in any circumstance of life. He had never

experienced such a strange and awful sensation. And what was most

agonising--it was more a sensation than a conception or idea, a direct

sensation, the most agonising of all the sensations he had known in

his life.



The head clerk began dictating to him the usual form of declaration,

that he could not pay, that he undertook to do so at a future date,

that he would not leave the town, nor sell his property, and so on.



"But you can't write, you can hardly hold the pen," observed the head

clerk, looking with curiosity at Raskolnikov. "Are you ill?"



"Yes, I am giddy. Go on!"



"That's all. Sign it."



The head clerk took the paper, and turned to attend to others.



Raskolnikov gave back the pen; but instead of getting up and going

away, he put his elbows on the table and pressed his head in his

hands. He felt as if a nail were being driven into his skull. A

strange idea suddenly occurred to him, to get up at once, to go up to

Nikodim Fomitch, and tell him everything that had happened yesterday,

and then to go with him to his lodgings and to show him the things in

the hole in the corner. The impulse was so strong that he got up from

his seat to carry it out. "Hadn't I better think a minute?" flashed

through his mind. "No, better cast off the burden without thinking."

But all at once he stood still, rooted to the spot. Nikodim Fomitch

was talking eagerly with Ilya Petrovitch, and the words reached him:



"It's impossible, they'll both be released. To begin with, the whole

story contradicts itself. Why should they have called the porter, if

it had been their doing? To inform against themselves? Or as a blind?

No, that would be too cunning! Besides, Pestryakov, the student, was

seen at the gate by both the porters and a woman as he went in. He was

walking with three friends, who left him only at the gate, and he

asked the porters to direct him, in the presence of the friends. Now,

would he have asked his way if he had been going with such an object?

As for Koch, he spent half an hour at the silversmith's below, before

he went up to the old woman and he left him at exactly a quarter to

eight. Now just consider . . ."



"But excuse me, how do you explain this contradiction? They state

themselves that they knocked and the door was locked; yet three

minutes later when they went up with the porter, it turned out the

door was unfastened."



"That's just it; the murderer must have been there and bolted himself

in; and they'd have caught him for a certainty if Koch had not been an

ass and gone to look for the porter too. /He/ must have seized the

interval to get downstairs and slip by them somehow. Koch keeps

crossing himself and saying: 'If I had been there, he would have

jumped out and killed me with his axe.' He is going to have a

thanksgiving service--ha, ha!"



"And no one saw the murderer?"



"They might well not see him; the house is a regular Noah's Ark," said

the head clerk, who was listening.



"It's clear, quite clear," Nikodim Fomitch repeated warmly.



"No, it is anything but clear," Ilya Petrovitch maintained.



Raskolnikov picked up his hat and walked towards the door, but he did

not reach it. . . .



When he recovered consciousness, he found himself sitting in a chair,

supported by someone on the right side, while someone else was

standing on the left, holding a yellowish glass filled with yellow

water, and Nikodim Fomitch standing before him, looking intently at

him. He got up from the chair.



"What's this? Are you ill?" Nikodim Fomitch asked, rather sharply.



"He could hardly hold his pen when he was signing," said the head

clerk, settling back in his place, and taking up his work again.



"Have you been ill long?" cried Ilya Petrovitch from his place, where

he, too, was looking through papers. He had, of course, come to look

at the sick man when he fainted, but retired at once when he

recovered.



"Since yesterday," muttered Raskolnikov in reply.



"Did you go out yesterday?"



"Yes."



"Though you were ill?"



"Yes."



"At what time?"



"About seven."



"And where did you go, my I ask?"



"Along the street."



"Short and clear."



Raskolnikov, white as a handkerchief, had answered sharply, jerkily,

without dropping his black feverish eyes before Ilya Petrovitch's

stare.



"He can scarcely stand upright. And you . . ." Nikodim Fomitch was

beginning.



"No matter," Ilya Petrovitch pronounced rather peculiarly.



Nikodim Fomitch would have made some further protest, but glancing at

the head clerk who was looking very hard at him, he did not speak.

There was a sudden silence. It was strange.



"Very well, then," concluded Ilya Petrovitch, "we will not detain

you."



Raskolnikov went out. He caught the sound of eager conversation on his

departure, and above the rest rose the questioning voice of Nikodim

Fomitch. In the street, his faintness passed off completely.



"A search--there will be a search at once," he repeated to himself,

hurrying home. "The brutes! they suspect."



His former terror mastered him completely again.







CHAPTER II



"And what if there has been a search already? What if I find them in

my room?"



But here was his room. Nothing and no one in it. No one had peeped in.

Even Nastasya had not touched it. But heavens! how could he have left

all those things in the hole?



He rushed to the corner, slipped his hand under the paper, pulled the

things out and lined his pockets with them. There were eight articles

in all: two little boxes with ear-rings or something of the sort, he

hardly looked to see; then four small leather cases. There was a

chain, too, merely wrapped in newspaper and something else in

newspaper, that looked like a decoration. . . . He put them all in the

different pockets of his overcoat, and the remaining pocket of his

trousers, trying to conceal them as much as possible. He took the

purse, too. Then he went out of his room, leaving the door open. He

walked quickly and resolutely, and though he felt shattered, he had

his senses about him. He was afraid of pursuit, he was afraid that in

another half-hour, another quarter of an hour perhaps, instructions

would be issued for his pursuit, and so at all costs, he must hide all

traces before then. He must clear everything up while he still had

some strength, some reasoning power left him. . . . Where was he to

go?



That had long been settled: "Fling them into the canal, and all traces

hidden in the water, the thing would be at an end." So he had decided

in the night of his delirium when several times he had had the impulse

to get up and go away, to make haste, and get rid of it all. But to

get rid of it, turned out to be a very difficult task. He wandered

along the bank of the Ekaterininsky Canal for half an hour or more and

looked several times at the steps running down to the water, but he

could not think of carrying out his plan; either rafts stood at the

steps' edge, and women were washing clothes on them, or boats were

moored there, and people were swarming everywhere. Moreover he could

be seen and noticed from the banks on all sides; it would look

suspicious for a man to go down on purpose, stop, and throw something

into the water. And what if the boxes were to float instead of

sinking? And of course they would. Even as it was, everyone he met

seemed to stare and look round, as if they had nothing to do but to

watch him. "Why is it, or can it be my fancy?" he thought.



At last the thought struck him that it might be better to go to the

Neva. There were not so many people there, he would be less observed,

and it would be more convenient in every way, above all it was further

off. He wondered how he could have been wandering for a good half-

hour, worried and anxious in this dangerous past without thinking of

it before. And that half-hour he had lost over an irrational plan,

simply because he had thought of it in delirium! He had become

extremely absent and forgetful and he was aware of it. He certainly

must make haste.



He walked towards the Neva along V---- Prospect, but on the way

another idea struck him. "Why to the Neva? Would it not be better to

go somewhere far off, to the Islands again, and there hide the things

in some solitary place, in a wood or under a bush, and mark the spot

perhaps?" And though he felt incapable of clear judgment, the idea

seemed to him a sound one. But he was not destined to go there. For

coming out of V---- Prospect towards the square, he saw on the left a

passage leading between two blank walls to a courtyard. On the right

hand, the blank unwhitewashed wall of a four-storied house stretched

far into the court; on the left, a wooden hoarding ran parallel with

it for twenty paces into the court, and then turned sharply to the

left. Here was a deserted fenced-off place where rubbish of different

sorts was lying. At the end of the court, the corner of a low, smutty,

stone shed, apparently part of some workshop, peeped from behind the

hoarding. It was probably a carriage builder's or carpenter's shed;

the whole place from the entrance was black with coal dust. Here would

be the place to throw it, he thought. Not seeing anyone in the yard,

he slipped in, and at once saw near the gate a sink, such as is often

put in yards where there are many workmen or cab-drivers; and on the

hoarding above had been scribbled in chalk the time-honoured

witticism, "Standing here strictly forbidden." This was all the

better, for there would be nothing suspicious about his going in.

"Here I could throw it all in a heap and get away!"



Looking round once more, with his hand already in his pocket, he

noticed against the outer wall, between the entrance and the sink, a

big unhewn stone, weighing perhaps sixty pounds. The other side of the

wall was a street. He could hear passers-by, always numerous in that

part, but he could not be seen from the entrance, unless someone came

in from the street, which might well happen indeed, so there was need

of haste.



He bent down over the stone, seized the top of it firmly in both

hands, and using all his strength turned it over. Under the stone was

a small hollow in the ground, and he immediately emptied his pocket

into it. The purse lay at the top, and yet the hollow was not filled

up. Then he seized the stone again and with one twist turned it back,

so that it was in the same position again, though it stood a very

little higher. But he scraped the earth about it and pressed it at the

edges with his foot. Nothing could be noticed.



Then he went out, and turned into the square. Again an intense, almost

unbearable joy overwhelmed him for an instant, as it had in the

police-office. "I have buried my tracks! And who, who can think of

looking under that stone? It has been lying there most likely ever

since the house was built, and will lie as many years more. And if it

were found, who would think of me? It is all over! No clue!" And he

laughed. Yes, he remembered that he began laughing a thin, nervous

noiseless laugh, and went on laughing all the time he was crossing the

square. But when he reached the K---- Boulevard where two days before

he had come upon that girl, his laughter suddenly ceased. Other ideas

crept into his mind. He felt all at once that it would be loathsome to

pass that seat on which after the girl was gone, he had sat and

pondered, and that it would be hateful, too, to meet that whiskered

policeman to whom he had given the twenty copecks: "Damn him!"



He walked, looking about him angrily and distractedly. All his ideas

now seemed to be circling round some single point, and he felt that

there really was such a point, and that now, now, he was left facing

that point--and for the first time, indeed, during the last two

months.



"Damn it all!" he thought suddenly, in a fit of ungovernable fury. "If

it has begun, then it has begun. Hang the new life! Good Lord, how

stupid it is! . . . And what lies I told to-day! How despicably I

fawned upon that wretched Ilya Petrovitch! But that is all folly! What

do I care for them all, and my fawning upon them! It is not that at

all! It is not that at all!"



Suddenly he stopped; a new utterly unexpected and exceedingly simple

question perplexed and bitterly confounded him.



"If it all has really been done deliberately and not idiotically, if I

really had a certain and definite object, how is it I did not even

glance into the purse and don't know what I had there, for which I

have undergone these agonies, and have deliberately undertaken this

base, filthy degrading business? And here I wanted at once to throw

into the water the purse together with all the things which I had not

seen either . . . how's that?"



Yes, that was so, that was all so. Yet he had known it all before, and

it was not a new question for him, even when it was decided in the

night without hesitation and consideration, as though so it must be,

as though it could not possibly be otherwise. . . . Yes, he had known

it all, and understood it all; it surely had all been settled even

yesterday at the moment when he was bending over the box and pulling

the jewel-cases out of it. . . . Yes, so it was.



"It is because I am very ill," he decided grimly at last, "I have been

worrying and fretting myself, and I don't know what I am doing. . . .

Yesterday and the day before yesterday and all this time I have been

worrying myself. . . . I shall get well and I shall not worry. . . .

But what if I don't get well at all? Good God, how sick I am of it

all!"



He walked on without resting. He had a terrible longing for some

distraction, but he did not know what to do, what to attempt. A new

overwhelming sensation was gaining more and more mastery over him

every moment; this was an immeasurable, almost physical, repulsion for

everything surrounding him, an obstinate, malignant feeling of hatred.

All who met him were loathsome to him--he loathed their faces, their

movements, their gestures. If anyone had addressed him, he felt that

he might have spat at him or bitten him. . . .



He stopped suddenly, on coming out on the bank of the Little Neva,

near the bridge to Vassilyevsky Ostrov. "Why, he lives here, in that

house," he thought, "why, I have not come to Razumihin of my own

accord! Here it's the same thing over again. . . . Very interesting to

know, though; have I come on purpose or have I simply walked here by

chance? Never mind, I said the day before yesterday that I would go

and see him the day /after/; well, and so I will! Besides I really

cannot go further now."



He went up to Razumihin's room on the fifth floor.



The latter was at home in his garret, busily writing at the moment,

and he opened the door himself. It was four months since they had seen

each other. Razumihin was sitting in a ragged dressing-gown, with

slippers on his bare feet, unkempt, unshaven and unwashed. His face

showed surprise.



"Is it you?" he cried. He looked his comrade up and down; then after a

brief pause, he whistled. "As hard up as all that! Why, brother,

you've cut me out!" he added, looking at Raskolnikov's rags. "Come sit

down, you are tired, I'll be bound."



And when he had sunk down on the American leather sofa, which was in

even worse condition than his own, Razumihin saw at once that his

visitor was ill.



"Why, you are seriously ill, do you know that?" He began feeling his

pulse. Raskolnikov pulled away his hand.



"Never mind," he said, "I have come for this: I have no lessons. . . .

I wanted, . . . but I don't really want lessons. . . ."



"But I say! You are delirious, you know!" Razumihin observed, watching

him carefully.



"No, I am not."



Raskolnikov got up from the sofa. As he had mounted the stairs to

Razumihin's, he had not realised that he would be meeting his friend

face to face. Now, in a flash, he knew, that what he was least of all

disposed for at that moment was to be face to face with anyone in the

wide world. His spleen rose within him. He almost choked with rage at

himself as soon as he crossed Razumihin's threshold.



"Good-bye," he said abruptly, and walked to the door.



"Stop, stop! You queer fish."



"I don't want to," said the other, again pulling away his hand.



"Then why the devil have you come? Are you mad, or what? Why, this is

. . . almost insulting! I won't let you go like that."



"Well, then, I came to you because I know no one but you who could

help . . . to begin . . . because you are kinder than anyone--

cleverer, I mean, and can judge . . . and now I see that I want

nothing. Do you hear? Nothing at all . . . no one's services . . . no

one's sympathy. I am by myself . . . alone. Come, that's enough. Leave

me alone."



"Stay a minute, you sweep! You are a perfect madman. As you like for

all I care. I have no lessons, do you see, and I don't care about

that, but there's a bookseller, Heruvimov--and he takes the place of a

lesson. I would not exchange him for five lessons. He's doing

publishing of a kind, and issuing natural science manuals and what a

circulation they have! The very titles are worth the money! You always

maintained that I was a fool, but by Jove, my boy, there are greater

fools than I am! Now he is setting up for being advanced, not that he

has an inkling of anything, but, of course, I encourage him. Here are

two signatures of the German text--in my opinion, the crudest

charlatanism; it discusses the question, 'Is woman a human being?'

And, of course, triumphantly proves that she is. Heruvimov is going to

bring out this work as a contribution to the woman question; I am

translating it; he will expand these two and a half signatures into

six, we shall make up a gorgeous title half a page long and bring it

out at half a rouble. It will do! He pays me six roubles the

signature, it works out to about fifteen roubles for the job, and I've

had six already in advance. When we have finished this, we are going

to begin a translation about whales, and then some of the dullest

scandals out of the second part of /Les Confessions/ we have marked

for translation; somebody has told Heruvimov, that Rousseau was a kind

of Radishchev. You may be sure I don't contradict him, hang him! Well,

would you like to do the second signature of '/Is woman a human

being?/' If you would, take the German and pens and paper--all those

are provided, and take three roubles; for as I have had six roubles in

advance on the whole thing, three roubles come to you for your share.

And when you have finished the signature there will be another three

roubles for you. And please don't think I am doing you a service;

quite the contrary, as soon as you came in, I saw how you could help

me; to begin with, I am weak in spelling, and secondly, I am sometimes

utterly adrift in German, so that I make it up as I go along for the

most part. The only comfort is, that it's bound to be a change for the

better. Though who can tell, maybe it's sometimes for the worse. Will

you take it?"



Raskolnikov took the German sheets in silence, took the three roubles

and without a word went out. Razumihin gazed after him in

astonishment. But when Raskolnikov was in the next street, he turned

back, mounted the stairs to Razumihin's again and laying on the table

the German article and the three roubles, went out again, still

without uttering a word.



"Are you raving, or what?" Razumihin shouted, roused to fury at last.

"What farce is this? You'll drive me crazy too . . . what did you come

to see me for, damn you?"



"I don't want . . . translation," muttered Raskolnikov from the

stairs.



"Then what the devil do you want?" shouted Razumihin from above.

Raskolnikov continued descending the staircase in silence.



"Hey, there! Where are you living?"



No answer.



"Well, confound you then!"



But Raskolnikov was already stepping into the street. On the

Nikolaevsky Bridge he was roused to full consciousness again by an

unpleasant incident. A coachman, after shouting at him two or three

times, gave him a violent lash on the back with his whip, for having

almost fallen under his horses' hoofs. The lash so infuriated him that

he dashed away to the railing (for some unknown reason he had been

walking in the very middle of the bridge in the traffic). He angrily

clenched and ground his teeth. He heard laughter, of course.



"Serves him right!"



"A pickpocket I dare say."



"Pretending to be drunk, for sure, and getting under the wheels on

purpose; and you have to answer for him."



"It's a regular profession, that's what it is."



But while he stood at the railing, still looking angry and bewildered

after the retreating carriage, and rubbing his back, he suddenly felt

someone thrust money into his hand. He looked. It was an elderly woman

in a kerchief and goatskin shoes, with a girl, probably her daughter

wearing a hat, and carrying a green parasol.



"Take it, my good man, in Christ's name."



He took it and they passed on. It was a piece of twenty copecks. From

his dress and appearance they might well have taken him for a beggar

asking alms in the streets, and the gift of the twenty copecks he

doubtless owed to the blow, which made them feel sorry for him.



He closed his hand on the twenty copecks, walked on for ten paces, and

turned facing the Neva, looking towards the palace. The sky was

without a cloud and the water was almost bright blue, which is so rare

in the Neva. The cupola of the cathedral, which is seen at its best

from the bridge about twenty paces from the chapel, glittered in the

sunlight, and in the pure air every ornament on it could be clearly

distinguished. The pain from the lash went off, and Raskolnikov forgot

about it; one uneasy and not quite definite idea occupied him now

completely. He stood still, and gazed long and intently into the

distance; this spot was especially familiar to him. When he was

attending the university, he had hundreds of times--generally on his

way home--stood still on this spot, gazed at this truly magnificent

spectacle and almost always marvelled at a vague and mysterious

emotion it roused in him. It left him strangely cold; this gorgeous

picture was for him blank and lifeless. He wondered every time at his

sombre and enigmatic impression and, mistrusting himself, put off

finding the explanation of it. He vividly recalled those old doubts

and perplexities, and it seemed to him that it was no mere chance that

he recalled them now. It struck him as strange and grotesque, that he

should have stopped at the same spot as before, as though he actually

imagined he could think the same thoughts, be interested in the same

theories and pictures that had interested him . . . so short a time

ago. He felt it almost amusing, and yet it wrung his heart. Deep down,

hidden far away out of sight all that seemed to him now--all his old

past, his old thoughts, his old problems and theories, his old

impressions and that picture and himself and all, all. . . . He felt

as though he were flying upwards, and everything were vanishing from

his sight. Making an unconscious movement with his hand, he suddenly

became aware of the piece of money in his fist. He opened his hand,

stared at the coin, and with a sweep of his arm flung it into the

water; then he turned and went home. It seemed to him, he had cut

himself off from everyone and from everything at that moment.



Evening was coming on when he reached home, so that he must have been

walking about six hours. How and where he came back he did not

remember. Undressing, and quivering like an overdriven horse, he lay

down on the sofa, drew his greatcoat over him, and at once sank into

oblivion. . . .



It was dusk when he was waked up by a fearful scream. Good God, what a

scream! Such unnatural sounds, such howling, wailing, grinding, tears,

blows and curses he had never heard.



He could never have imagined such brutality, such frenzy. In terror he

sat up in bed, almost swooning with agony. But the fighting, wailing

and cursing grew louder and louder. And then to his intense amazement

he caught the voice of his landlady. She was howling, shrieking and

wailing, rapidly, hurriedly, incoherently, so that he could not make

out what she was talking about; she was beseeching, no doubt, not to

be beaten, for she was being mercilessly beaten on the stairs. The

voice of her assailant was so horrible from spite and rage that it was

almost a croak; but he, too, was saying something, and just as quickly

and indistinctly, hurrying and spluttering. All at once Raskolnikov

trembled; he recognised the voice--it was the voice of Ilya

Petrovitch. Ilya Petrovitch here and beating the landlady! He is

kicking her, banging her head against the steps--that's clear, that

can be told from the sounds, from the cries and the thuds. How is it,

is the world topsy-turvy? He could hear people running in crowds from

all the storeys and all the staircases; he heard voices, exclamations,

knocking, doors banging. "But why, why, and how could it be?" he

repeated, thinking seriously that he had gone mad. But no, he heard

too distinctly! And they would come to him then next, "for no doubt

. . . it's all about that . . . about yesterday. . . . Good God!" He

would have fastened his door with the latch, but he could not lift his

hand . . . besides, it would be useless. Terror gripped his heart like

ice, tortured him and numbed him. . . . But at last all this uproar,

after continuing about ten minutes, began gradually to subside. The

landlady was moaning and groaning; Ilya Petrovitch was still uttering

threats and curses. . . . But at last he, too, seemed to be silent,

and now he could not be heard. "Can he have gone away? Good Lord!"

Yes, and now the landlady is going too, still weeping and moaning

. . . and then her door slammed. . . . Now the crowd was going from

the stairs to their rooms, exclaiming, disputing, calling to one

another, raising their voices to a shout, dropping them to a whisper.

There must have been numbers of them--almost all the inmates of the

block. "But, good God, how could it be! And why, why had he come

here!"



Raskolnikov sank worn out on the sofa, but could not close his eyes.

He lay for half an hour in such anguish, such an intolerable sensation

of infinite terror as he had never experienced before. Suddenly a

bright light flashed into his room. Nastasya came in with a candle and

a plate of soup. Looking at him carefully and ascertaining that he was

not asleep, she set the candle on the table and began to lay out what

she had brought--bread, salt, a plate, a spoon.



"You've eaten nothing since yesterday, I warrant. You've been trudging

about all day, and you're shaking with fever."



"Nastasya . . . what were they beating the landlady for?"



She looked intently at him.



"Who beat the landlady?"



"Just now . . . half an hour ago, Ilya Petrovitch, the assistant

superintendent, on the stairs. . . . Why was he ill-treating her like

that, and . . . why was he here?"



Nastasya scrutinised him, silent and frowning, and her scrutiny lasted

a long time. He felt uneasy, even frightened at her searching eyes.



"Nastasya, why don't you speak?" he said timidly at last in a weak

voice.



"It's the blood," she answered at last softly, as though speaking to

herself.



"Blood? What blood?" he muttered, growing white and turning towards

the wall.



Nastasya still looked at him without speaking.



"Nobody has been beating the landlady," she declared at last in a

firm, resolute voice.



He gazed at her, hardly able to breathe.



"I heard it myself. . . . I was not asleep . . . I was sitting up," he

said still more timidly. "I listened a long while. The assistant

superintendent came. . . . Everyone ran out on to the stairs from all

the flats."



"No one has been here. That's the blood crying in your ears. When

there's no outlet for it and it gets clotted, you begin fancying

things. . . . Will you eat something?"



He made no answer. Nastasya still stood over him, watching him.



"Give me something to drink . . . Nastasya."



She went downstairs and returned with a white earthenware jug of

water. He remembered only swallowing one sip of the cold water and

spilling some on his neck. Then followed forgetfulness.







CHAPTER III



He was not completely unconscious, however, all the time he was ill;

he was in a feverish state, sometimes delirious, sometimes half

conscious. He remembered a great deal afterwards. Sometimes it seemed

as though there were a number of people round him; they wanted to take

him away somewhere, there was a great deal of squabbling and

discussing about him. Then he would be alone in the room; they had all

gone away afraid of him, and only now and then opened the door a crack

to look at him; they threatened him, plotted something together,

laughed, and mocked at him. He remembered Nastasya often at his

bedside; he distinguished another person, too, whom he seemed to know

very well, though he could not remember who he was, and this fretted

him, even made him cry. Sometimes he fancied he had been lying there a

month; at other times it all seemed part of the same day. But of

/that/--of /that/ he had no recollection, and yet every minute he felt

that he had forgotten something he ought to remember. He worried and

tormented himself trying to remember, moaned, flew into a rage, or

sank into awful, intolerable terror. Then he struggled to get up,

would have run away, but someone always prevented him by force, and

he sank back into impotence and forgetfulness. At last he returned to

complete consciousness.



It happened at ten o'clock in the morning. On fine days the sun shone

into the room at that hour, throwing a streak of light on the right

wall and the corner near the door. Nastasya was standing beside him

with another person, a complete stranger, who was looking at him very

inquisitively. He was a young man with a beard, wearing a full, short-

waisted coat, and looked like a messenger. The landlady was peeping in

at the half-opened door. Raskolnikov sat up.



"Who is this, Nastasya?" he asked, pointing to the young man.



"I say, he's himself again!" she said.



"He is himself," echoed the man.



Concluding that he had returned to his senses, the landlady closed the

door and disappeared. She was always shy and dreaded conversations or

discussions. She was a woman of forty, not at all bad-looking, fat and

buxom, with black eyes and eyebrows, good-natured from fatness and

laziness, and absurdly bashful.



"Who . . . are you?" he went on, addressing the man. But at that

moment the door was flung open, and, stooping a little, as he was so

tall, Razumihin came in.



"What a cabin it is!" he cried. "I am always knocking my head. You

call this a lodging! So you are conscious, brother? I've just heard

the news from Pashenka."



"He has just come to," said Nastasya.



"Just come to," echoed the man again, with a smile.



"And who are you?" Razumihin asked, suddenly addressing him. "My name

is Vrazumihin, at your service; not Razumihin, as I am always called,

but Vrazumihin, a student and gentleman; and he is my friend. And who

are you?"



"I am the messenger from our office, from the merchant Shelopaev, and

I've come on business."



"Please sit down." Razumihin seated himself on the other side of the

table. "It's a good thing you've come to, brother," he went on to

Raskolnikov. "For the last four days you have scarcely eaten or drunk

anything. We had to give you tea in spoonfuls. I brought Zossimov to

see you twice. You remember Zossimov? He examined you carefully and

said at once it was nothing serious--something seemed to have gone to

your head. Some nervous nonsense, the result of bad feeding, he says

you have not had enough beer and radish, but it's nothing much, it

will pass and you will be all right. Zossimov is a first-rate fellow!

He is making quite a name. Come, I won't keep you," he said,

addressing the man again. "Will you explain what you want? You must

know, Rodya, this is the second time they have sent from the office;

but it was another man last time, and I talked to him. Who was it came

before?"



"That was the day before yesterday, I venture to say, if you please,

sir. That was Alexey Semyonovitch; he is in our office, too."



"He was more intelligent than you, don't you think so?"



"Yes, indeed, sir, he is of more weight than I am."



"Quite so; go on."



"At your mamma's request, through Afanasy Ivanovitch Vahrushin, of

whom I presume you have heard more than once, a remittance is sent to

you from our office," the man began, addressing Raskolnikov. "If you

are in an intelligible condition, I've thirty-five roubles to remit to

you, as Semyon Semyonovitch has received from Afanasy Ivanovitch at

your mamma's request instructions to that effect, as on previous

occasions. Do you know him, sir?"



"Yes, I remember . . . Vahrushin," Raskolnikov said dreamily.



"You hear, he knows Vahrushin," cried Razumihin. "He is in 'an

intelligible condition'! And I see you are an intelligent man too.

Well, it's always pleasant to hear words of wisdom."



"That's the gentleman, Vahrushin, Afanasy Ivanovitch. And at the

request of your mamma, who has sent you a remittance once before in

the same manner through him, he did not refuse this time also, and

sent instructions to Semyon Semyonovitch some days since to hand you

thirty-five roubles in the hope of better to come."



"That 'hoping for better to come' is the best thing you've said,

though 'your mamma' is not bad either. Come then, what do you say? Is

he fully conscious, eh?"



"That's all right. If only he can sign this little paper."



"He can scrawl his name. Have you got the book?"



"Yes, here's the book."



"Give it to me. Here, Rodya, sit up. I'll hold you. Take the pen and

scribble 'Raskolnikov' for him. For just now, brother, money is

sweeter to us than treacle."



"I don't want it," said Raskolnikov, pushing away the pen.



"Not want it?"



"I won't sign it."



"How the devil can you do without signing it?"



"I don't want . . . the money."



"Don't want the money! Come, brother, that's nonsense, I bear witness.

Don't trouble, please, it's only that he is on his travels again. But

that's pretty common with him at all times though. . . . You are a man

of judgment and we will take him in hand, that is, more simply, take

his hand and he will sign it. Here."



"But I can come another time."



"No, no. Why should we trouble you? You are a man of judgment. . . .

Now, Rodya, don't keep your visitor, you see he is waiting," and he

made ready to hold Raskolnikov's hand in earnest.



"Stop, I'll do it alone," said the latter, taking the pen and signing

his name.



The messenger took out the money and went away.



"Bravo! And now, brother, are you hungry?"



"Yes," answered Raskolnikov.



"Is there any soup?"



"Some of yesterday's," answered Nastasya, who was still standing

there.



"With potatoes and rice in it?"



"Yes."



"I know it by heart. Bring soup and give us some tea."



"Very well."



Raskolnikov looked at all this with profound astonishment and a dull,

unreasoning terror. He made up his mind to keep quiet and see what

would happen. "I believe I am not wandering. I believe it's reality,"

he thought.



In a couple of minutes Nastasya returned with the soup, and announced

that the tea would be ready directly. With the soup she brought two

spoons, two plates, salt, pepper, mustard for the beef, and so on. The

table was set as it had not been for a long time. The cloth was clean.



"It would not be amiss, Nastasya, if Praskovya Pavlovna were to send

us up a couple of bottles of beer. We could empty them."



"Well, you are a cool hand," muttered Nastasya, and she departed to

carry out his orders.



Raskolnikov still gazed wildly with strained attention. Meanwhile

Razumihin sat down on the sofa beside him, as clumsily as a bear put

his left arm round Raskolnikov's head, although he was able to sit up,

and with his right hand gave him a spoonful of soup, blowing on it

that it might not burn him. But the soup was only just warm.

Raskolnikov swallowed one spoonful greedily, then a second, then a

third. But after giving him a few more spoonfuls of soup, Razumihin

suddenly stopped, and said that he must ask Zossimov whether he ought

to have more.



Nastasya came in with two bottles of beer.



"And will you have tea?"



"Yes."



"Cut along, Nastasya, and bring some tea, for tea we may venture on

without the faculty. But here is the beer!" He moved back to his

chair, pulled the soup and meat in front of him, and began eating as

though he had not touched food for three days.



"I must tell you, Rodya, I dine like this here every day now," he

mumbled with his mouth full of beef, "and it's all Pashenka, your dear

little landlady, who sees to that; she loves to do anything for me. I

don't ask for it, but, of course, I don't object. And here's Nastasya

with the tea. She is a quick girl. Nastasya, my dear, won't you have

some beer?"



"Get along with your nonsense!"



"A cup of tea, then?"



"A cup of tea, maybe."



"Pour it out. Stay, I'll pour it out myself. Sit down."



He poured out two cups, left his dinner, and sat on the sofa again. As

before, he put his left arm round the sick man's head, raised him up

and gave him tea in spoonfuls, again blowing each spoonful steadily

and earnestly, as though this process was the principal and most

effective means towards his friend's recovery. Raskolnikov said

nothing and made no resistance, though he felt quite strong enough to

sit up on the sofa without support and could not merely have held a

cup or a spoon, but even perhaps could have walked about. But from

some queer, almost animal, cunning he conceived the idea of hiding his

strength and lying low for a time, pretending if necessary not to be

yet in full possession of his faculties, and meanwhile listening to

find out what was going on. Yet he could not overcome his sense of

repugnance. After sipping a dozen spoonfuls of tea, he suddenly

released his head, pushed the spoon away capriciously, and sank back

on the pillow. There were actually real pillows under his head now,

down pillows in clean cases, he observed that, too, and took note of

it.



"Pashenka must give us some raspberry jam to-day to make him some

raspberry tea," said Razumihin, going back to his chair and attacking

his soup and beer again.



"And where is she to get raspberries for you?" asked Nastasya,

balancing a saucer on her five outspread fingers and sipping tea

through a lump of sugar.



"She'll get it at the shop, my dear. You see, Rodya, all sorts of

things have been happening while you have been laid up. When you

decamped in that rascally way without leaving your address, I felt so

angry that I resolved to find you out and punish you. I set to work

that very day. How I ran about making inquiries for you! This lodging

of yours I had forgotten, though I never remembered it, indeed,

because I did not know it; and as for your old lodgings, I could only

remember it was at the Five Corners, Harlamov's house. I kept trying

to find that Harlamov's house, and afterwards it turned out that it

was not Harlamov's, but Buch's. How one muddles up sound sometimes! So

I lost my temper, and I went on the chance to the address bureau next

day, and only fancy, in two minutes they looked you up! Your name is

down there."



"My name!"



"I should think so; and yet a General Kobelev they could not find

while I was there. Well, it's a long story. But as soon as I did land

on this place, I soon got to know all your affairs--all, all, brother,

I know everything; Nastasya here will tell you. I made the

acquaintance of Nikodim Fomitch and Ilya Petrovitch, and the house-

porter and Mr. Zametov, Alexandr Grigorievitch, the head clerk in the

police office, and, last, but not least, of Pashenka; Nastasya here

knows. . . ."



"He's got round her," Nastasya murmured, smiling slyly.



"Why don't you put the sugar in your tea, Nastasya Nikiforovna?"



"You are a one!" Nastasya cried suddenly, going off into a giggle. "I

am not Nikiforovna, but Petrovna," she added suddenly, recovering from

her mirth.



"I'll make a note of it. Well, brother, to make a long story short, I

was going in for a regular explosion here to uproot all malignant

influences in the locality, but Pashenka won the day. I had not

expected, brother, to find her so . . . prepossessing. Eh, what do you

think?"



Raskolnikov did not speak, but he still kept his eyes fixed upon him,

full of alarm.



"And all that could be wished, indeed, in every respect," Razumihin

went on, not at all embarrassed by his silence.



"Ah, the sly dog!" Nastasya shrieked again. This conversation afforded

her unspeakable delight.



"It's a pity, brother, that you did not set to work in the right way

at first. You ought to have approached her differently. She is, so to

speak, a most unaccountable character. But we will talk about her

character later. . . . How could you let things come to such a pass

that she gave up sending you your dinner? And that I O U? You must

have been mad to sign an I O U. And that promise of marriage when her

daughter, Natalya Yegorovna, was alive? . . . I know all about it! But

I see that's a delicate matter and I am an ass; forgive me. But,

talking of foolishness, do you know Praskovya Pavlovna is not nearly

so foolish as you would think at first sight?"



"No," mumbled Raskolnikov, looking away, but feeling that it was

better to keep up the conversation.



"She isn't, is she?" cried Razumihin, delighted to get an answer out

of him. "But she is not very clever either, eh? She is essentially,

essentially an unaccountable character! I am sometimes quite at a

loss, I assure you. . . . She must be forty; she says she is thirty-

six, and of course she has every right to say so. But I swear I judge

her intellectually, simply from the metaphysical point of view; there

is a sort of symbolism sprung up between us, a sort of algebra or what

not! I don't understand it! Well, that's all nonsense. Only, seeing

that you are not a student now and have lost your lessons and your

clothes, and that through the young lady's death she has no need to

treat you as a relation, she suddenly took fright; and as you hid in

your den and dropped all your old relations with her, she planned to

get rid of you. And she's been cherishing that design a long time, but

was sorry to lose the I O U, for you assured her yourself that your

mother would pay."



"It was base of me to say that. . . . My mother herself is almost a

beggar . . . and I told a lie to keep my lodging . . . and be fed,"

Raskolnikov said loudly and distinctly.



"Yes, you did very sensibly. But the worst of it is that at that point

Mr. Tchebarov turns up, a business man. Pashenka would never have

thought of doing anything on her own account, she is too retiring; but

the business man is by no means retiring, and first thing he puts the

question, 'Is there any hope of realising the I O U?' Answer: there

is, because he has a mother who would save her Rodya with her hundred

and twenty-five roubles pension, if she has to starve herself; and a

sister, too, who would go into bondage for his sake. That's what he

was building upon. . . . Why do you start? I know all the ins and outs

of your affairs now, my dear boy--it's not for nothing that you were

so open with Pashenka when you were her prospective son-in-law, and I

say all this as a friend. . . . But I tell you what it is; an honest

and sensitive man is open; and a business man 'listens and goes on

eating' you up. Well, then she gave the I O U by way of payment to

this Tchebarov, and without hesitation he made a formal demand for

payment. When I heard of all this I wanted to blow him up, too, to

clear my conscience, but by that time harmony reigned between me and

Pashenka, and I insisted on stopping the whole affair, engaging that

you would pay. I went security for you, brother. Do you understand? We

called Tchebarov, flung him ten roubles and got the I O U back from

him, and here I have the honour of presenting it to you. She trusts

your word now. Here, take it, you see I have torn it."



Razumihin put the note on the table. Raskolnikov looked at him and

turned to the wall without uttering a word. Even Razumihin felt a

twinge.



"I see, brother," he said a moment later, "that I have been playing

the fool again. I thought I should amuse you with my chatter, and I

believe I have only made you cross."



"Was it you I did not recognise when I was delirious?" Raskolnikov

asked, after a moment's pause without turning his head.



"Yes, and you flew into a rage about it, especially when I brought

Zametov one day."



"Zametov? The head clerk? What for?" Raskolnikov turned round quickly

and fixed his eyes on Razumihin.



"What's the matter with you? . . . What are you upset about? He wanted

to make your acquaintance because I talked to him a lot about you.

. . . How could I have found out so much except from him? He is a

capital fellow, brother, first-rate . . . in his own way, of course.

Now we are friends--see each other almost every day. I have moved into

this part, you know. I have only just moved. I've been with him to

Luise Ivanovna once or twice. . . . Do you remember Luise, Luise

Ivanovna?



"Did I say anything in delirium?"



"I should think so! You were beside yourself."



"What did I rave about?"



"What next? What did you rave about? What people do rave about. . . .

Well, brother, now I must not lose time. To work." He got up from the

table and took up his cap.



"What did I rave about?"



"How he keeps on! Are you afraid of having let out some secret? Don't

worry yourself; you said nothing about a countess. But you said a lot

about a bulldog, and about ear-rings and chains, and about Krestovsky

Island, and some porter, and Nikodim Fomitch and Ilya Petrovitch, the

assistant superintendent. And another thing that was of special

interest to you was your own sock. You whined, 'Give me my sock.'

Zametov hunted all about your room for your socks, and with his own

scented, ring-bedecked fingers he gave you the rag. And only then were

you comforted, and for the next twenty-four hours you held the

wretched thing in your hand; we could not get it from you. It is most

likely somewhere under your quilt at this moment. And then you asked

so piteously for fringe for your trousers. We tried to find out what

sort of fringe, but we could not make it out. Now to business! Here

are thirty-five roubles; I take ten of them, and shall give you an

account of them in an hour or two. I will let Zossimov know at the

same time, though he ought to have been here long ago, for it is

nearly twelve. And you, Nastasya, look in pretty often while I am

away, to see whether he wants a drink or anything else. And I will

tell Pashenka what is wanted myself. Good-bye!"



"He calls her Pashenka! Ah, he's a deep one!" said Nastasya as he went

out; then she opened the door and stood listening, but could not

resist running downstairs after him. She was very eager to hear what

he would say to the landlady. She was evidently quite fascinated by

Razumihin.



No sooner had she left the room than the sick man flung off the

bedclothes and leapt out of bed like a madman. With burning, twitching

impatience he had waited for them to be gone so that he might set to

work. But to what work? Now, as though to spite him, it eluded him.



"Good God, only tell me one thing: do they know of it yet or not? What

if they know it and are only pretending, mocking me while I am laid

up, and then they will come in and tell me that it's been discovered

long ago and that they have only . . . What am I to do now? That's

what I've forgotten, as though on purpose; forgotten it all at once, I

remembered a minute ago."



He stood in the middle of the room and gazed in miserable bewilderment

about him; he walked to the door, opened it, listened; but that was

not what he wanted. Suddenly, as though recalling something, he rushed

to the corner where there was a hole under the paper, began examining

it, put his hand into the hole, fumbled--but that was not it. He went

to the stove, opened it and began rummaging in the ashes; the frayed

edges of his trousers and the rags cut off his pocket were lying there

just as he had thrown them. No one had looked, then! Then he

remembered the sock about which Razumihin had just been telling him.

Yes, there it lay on the sofa under the quilt, but it was so covered

with dust and grime that Zametov could not have seen anything on it.



"Bah, Zametov! The police office! And why am I sent for to the police

office? Where's the notice? Bah! I am mixing it up; that was then. I

looked at my sock then, too, but now . . . now I have been ill. But

what did Zametov come for? Why did Razumihin bring him?" he muttered,

helplessly sitting on the sofa again. "What does it mean? Am I still

in delirium, or is it real? I believe it is real. . . . Ah, I

remember; I must escape! Make haste to escape. Yes, I must, I must

escape! Yes . . . but where? And where are my clothes? I've no boots.

They've taken them away! They've hidden them! I understand! Ah, here

is my coat--they passed that over! And here is money on the table,

thank God! And here's the I O U . . . I'll take the money and go and

take another lodging. They won't find me! . . . Yes, but the address

bureau? They'll find me, Razumihin will find me. Better escape

altogether . . . far away . . . to America, and let them do their

worst! And take the I O U . . . it would be of use there. . . . What

else shall I take? They think I am ill! They don't know that I can

walk, ha-ha-ha! I could see by their eyes that they know all about it!

If only I could get downstairs! And what if they have set a watch

there--policemen! What's this tea? Ah, and here is beer left, half a

bottle, cold!"



He snatched up the bottle, which still contained a glassful of beer,

and gulped it down with relish, as though quenching a flame in his

breast. But in another minute the beer had gone to his head, and a

faint and even pleasant shiver ran down his spine. He lay down and

pulled the quilt over him. His sick and incoherent thoughts grew more

and more disconnected, and soon a light, pleasant drowsiness came upon

him. With a sense of comfort he nestled his head into the pillow,

wrapped more closely about him the soft, wadded quilt which had

replaced the old, ragged greatcoat, sighed softly and sank into a

deep, sound, refreshing sleep.



He woke up, hearing someone come in. He opened his eyes and saw

Razumihin standing in the doorway, uncertain whether to come in or

not. Raskolnikov sat up quickly on the sofa and gazed at him, as

though trying to recall something.



"Ah, you are not asleep! Here I am! Nastasya, bring in the parcel!"

Razumihin shouted down the stairs. "You shall have the account

directly."



"What time is it?" asked Raskolnikov, looking round uneasily.



"Yes, you had a fine sleep, brother, it's almost evening, it will be

six o'clock directly. You have slept more than six hours."



"Good heavens! Have I?"



"And why not? It will do you good. What's the hurry? A tryst, is it?

We've all time before us. I've been waiting for the last three hours

for you; I've been up twice and found you asleep. I've called on

Zossimov twice; not at home, only fancy! But no matter, he will turn

up. And I've been out on my own business, too. You know I've been

moving to-day, moving with my uncle. I have an uncle living with me

now. But that's no matter, to business. Give me the parcel, Nastasya.

We will open it directly. And how do you feel now, brother?"



"I am quite well, I am not ill. Razumihin, have you been here long?"



"I tell you I've been waiting for the last three hours."



"No, before."



"How do you mean?"



"How long have you been coming here?"



"Why I told you all about it this morning. Don't you remember?"



Raskolnikov pondered. The morning seemed like a dream to him. He could

not remember alone, and looked inquiringly at Razumihin.



"Hm!" said the latter, "he has forgotten. I fancied then that you were

not quite yourself. Now you are better for your sleep. . . . You

really look much better. First-rate! Well, to business. Look here, my

dear boy."



He began untying the bundle, which evidently interested him.



"Believe me, brother, this is something specially near my heart. For

we must make a man of you. Let's begin from the top. Do you see this

cap?" he said, taking out of the bundle a fairly good though cheap and

ordinary cap. "Let me try it on."



"Presently, afterwards," said Raskolnikov, waving it off pettishly.



"Come, Rodya, my boy, don't oppose it, afterwards will be too late;

and I shan't sleep all night, for I bought it by guess, without

measure. Just right!" he cried triumphantly, fitting it on, "just your

size! A proper head-covering is the first thing in dress and a

recommendation in its own way. Tolstyakov, a friend of mine, is always

obliged to take off his pudding basin when he goes into any public

place where other people wear their hats or caps. People think he does

it from slavish politeness, but it's simply because he is ashamed of

his bird's nest; he is such a boastful fellow! Look, Nastasya, here

are two specimens of headgear: this Palmerston"--he took from the

corner Raskolnikov's old, battered hat, which for some unknown reason,

he called a Palmerston--"or this jewel! Guess the price, Rodya, what

do you suppose I paid for it, Nastasya!" he said, turning to her,

seeing that Raskolnikov did not speak.



"Twenty copecks, no more, I dare say," answered Nastasya.



"Twenty copecks, silly!" he cried, offended. "Why, nowadays you would

cost more than that--eighty copecks! And that only because it has been

worn. And it's bought on condition that when's it's worn out, they

will give you another next year. Yes, on my word! Well, now let us

pass to the United States of America, as they called them at school. I

assure you I am proud of these breeches," and he exhibited to

Raskolnikov a pair of light, summer trousers of grey woollen material.

"No holes, no spots, and quite respectable, although a little worn;

and a waistcoat to match, quite in the fashion. And its being worn

really is an improvement, it's softer, smoother. . . . You see, Rodya,

to my thinking, the great thing for getting on in the world is always

to keep to the seasons; if you don't insist on having asparagus in

January, you keep your money in your purse; and it's the same with

this purchase. It's summer now, so I've been buying summer things--

warmer materials will be wanted for autumn, so you will have to throw

these away in any case . . . especially as they will be done for by

then from their own lack of coherence if not your higher standard of

luxury. Come, price them! What do you say? Two roubles twenty-five

copecks! And remember the condition: if you wear these out, you will

have another suit for nothing! They only do business on that system at

Fedyaev's; if you've bought a thing once, you are satisfied for life,

for you will never go there again of your own free will. Now for the

boots. What do you say? You see that they are a bit worn, but they'll

last a couple of months, for it's foreign work and foreign leather;

the secretary of the English Embassy sold them last week--he had only

worn them six days, but he was very short of cash. Price--a rouble and

a half. A bargain?"



"But perhaps they won't fit," observed Nastasya.



"Not fit? Just look!" and he pulled out of his pocket Raskolnikov's

old, broken boot, stiffly coated with dry mud. "I did not go empty-

handed--they took the size from this monster. We all did our best. And

as to your linen, your landlady has seen to that. Here, to begin with

are three shirts, hempen but with a fashionable front. . . . Well now

then, eighty copecks the cap, two roubles twenty-five copecks the

suit--together three roubles five copecks--a rouble and a half for the

boots--for, you see, they are very good--and that makes four roubles

fifty-five copecks; five roubles for the underclothes--they were

bought in the lo-- which makes exactly nine roubles fifty-five

copecks. Forty-five copecks change in coppers. Will you take it? And

so, Rodya, you are set up with a complete new rig-out, for your

overcoat will serve, and even has a style of its own. That comes from

getting one's clothes from Sharmer's! As for your socks and other

things, I leave them to you; we've twenty-five roubles left. And as

for Pashenka and paying for your lodging, don't you worry. I tell you

she'll trust you for anything. And now, brother, let me change your

linen, for I daresay you will throw off your illness with your shirt."



"Let me be! I don't want to!" Raskolnikov waved him off. He had

listened with disgust to Razumihin's efforts to be playful about his

purchases.



"Come, brother, don't tell me I've been trudging around for nothing,"

Razumihin insisted. "Nastasya, don't be bashful, but help me--that's

it," and in spite of Raskolnikov's resistance he changed his linen.

The latter sank back on the pillows and for a minute or two said

nothing.



"It will be long before I get rid of them," he thought. "What money

was all that bought with?" he asked at last, gazing at the wall.



"Money? Why, your own, what the messenger brought from Vahrushin, your

mother sent it. Have you forgotten that, too?"



"I remember now," said Raskolnikov after a long, sullen silence.

Razumihin looked at him, frowning and uneasy.



The door opened and a tall, stout man whose appearance seemed familiar

to Raskolnikov came in.







CHAPTER IV



Zossimov was a tall, fat man with a puffy, colourless, clean-shaven

face and straight flaxen hair. He wore spectacles, and a big gold ring

on his fat finger. He was twenty-seven. He had on a light grey

fashionable loose coat, light summer trousers, and everything about

him loose, fashionable and spick and span; his linen was

irreproachable, his watch-chain was massive. In manner he was slow

and, as it were, nonchalant, and at the same time studiously free and

easy; he made efforts to conceal his self-importance, but it was

apparent at every instant. All his acquaintances found him tedious,

but said he was clever at his work.



"I've been to you twice to-day, brother. You see, he's come to

himself," cried Razumihin.



"I see, I see; and how do we feel now, eh?" said Zossimov to

Raskolnikov, watching him carefully and, sitting down at the foot of

the sofa, he settled himself as comfortably as he could.



"He is still depressed," Razumihin went on. "We've just changed his

linen and he almost cried."



"That's very natural; you might have put it off if he did not wish it.

. . . His pulse is first-rate. Is your head still aching, eh?"



"I am well, I am perfectly well!" Raskolnikov declared positively and

irritably. He raised himself on the sofa and looked at them with

glittering eyes, but sank back on to the pillow at once and turned to

the wall. Zossimov watched him intently.



"Very good. . . . Going on all right," he said lazily. "Has he eaten

anything?"



They told him, and asked what he might have.



"He may have anything . . . soup, tea . . . mushrooms and cucumbers,

of course, you must not give him; he'd better not have meat either,

and . . . but no need to tell you that!" Razumihin and he looked at

each other. "No more medicine or anything. I'll look at him again

to-morrow. Perhaps, to-day even . . . but never mind . . ."



"To-morrow evening I shall take him for a walk," said Razumihin. "We

are going to the Yusupov garden and then to the Palais de Crystal."



"I would not disturb him to-morrow at all, but I don't know . . . a

little, maybe . . . but we'll see."



"Ach, what a nuisance! I've got a house-warming party to-night; it's

only a step from here. Couldn't he come? He could lie on the sofa. You

are coming?" Razumihin said to Zossimov. "Don't forget, you promised."



"All right, only rather later. What are you going to do?"



"Oh, nothing--tea, vodka, herrings. There will be a pie . . . just our

friends."



"And who?"



"All neighbours here, almost all new friends, except my old uncle, and

he is new too--he only arrived in Petersburg yesterday to see to some

business of his. We meet once in five years."



"What is he?"



"He's been stagnating all his life as a district postmaster; gets a

little pension. He is sixty-five--not worth talking about. . . . But I

am fond of him. Porfiry Petrovitch, the head of the Investigation

Department here . . . But you know him."



"Is he a relation of yours, too?"



"A very distant one. But why are you scowling? Because you quarrelled

once, won't you come then?"



"I don't care a damn for him."



"So much the better. Well, there will be some students, a teacher, a

government clerk, a musician, an officer and Zametov."



"Do tell me, please, what you or he"--Zossimov nodded at Raskolnikov--

"can have in common with this Zametov?"



"Oh, you particular gentleman! Principles! You are worked by

principles, as it were by springs; you won't venture to turn round on

your own account. If a man is a nice fellow, that's the only principle

I go upon. Zametov is a delightful person."



"Though he does take bribes."



"Well, he does! and what of it? I don't care if he does take bribes,"

Razumihin cried with unnatural irritability. "I don't praise him for

taking bribes. I only say he is a nice man in his own way! But if one

looks at men in all ways--are there many good ones left? Why, I am

sure I shouldn't be worth a baked onion myself . . . perhaps with you

thrown in."



"That's too little; I'd give two for you."



"And I wouldn't give more than one for you. No more of your jokes!

Zametov is no more than a boy. I can pull his hair and one must draw

him not repel him. You'll never improve a man by repelling him,

especially a boy. One has to be twice as careful with a boy. Oh, you

progressive dullards! You don't understand. You harm yourselves

running another man down. . . . But if you want to know, we really

have something in common."



"I should like to know what."



"Why, it's all about a house-painter. . . . We are getting him out of

a mess! Though indeed there's nothing to fear now. The matter is

absolutely self-evident. We only put on steam."



"A painter?"



"Why, haven't I told you about it? I only told you the beginning then

about the murder of the old pawnbroker-woman. Well, the painter is

mixed up in it . . ."



"Oh, I heard about that murder before and was rather interested in it

. . . partly . . . for one reason. . . . I read about it in the

papers, too. . . ."



"Lizaveta was murdered, too," Nastasya blurted out, suddenly

addressing Raskolnikov. She remained in the room all the time,

standing by the door listening.



"Lizaveta," murmured Raskolnikov hardly audibly.



"Lizaveta, who sold old clothes. Didn't you know her? She used to come

here. She mended a shirt for you, too."



Raskolnikov turned to the wall where in the dirty, yellow paper he

picked out one clumsy, white flower with brown lines on it and began

examining how many petals there were in it, how many scallops in the

petals and how many lines on them. He felt his arms and legs as

lifeless as though they had been cut off. He did not attempt to move,

but stared obstinately at the flower.



"But what about the painter?" Zossimov interrupted Nastasya's chatter

with marked displeasure. She sighed and was silent.



"Why, he was accused of the murder," Razumihin went on hotly.



"Was there evidence against him then?"



"Evidence, indeed! Evidence that was no evidence, and that's what we

have to prove. It was just as they pitched on those fellows, Koch and

Pestryakov, at first. Foo! how stupidly it's all done, it makes one

sick, though it's not one's business! Pestryakov may be coming

to-night. . . . By the way, Rodya, you've heard about the business

already; it happened before you were ill, the day before you fainted

at the police office while they were talking about it."



Zossimov looked curiously at Raskolnikov. He did not stir.



"But I say, Razumihin, I wonder at you. What a busybody you are!"

Zossimov observed.



"Maybe I am, but we will get him off anyway," shouted Razumihin,

bringing his fist down on the table. "What's the most offensive is not

their lying--one can always forgive lying--lying is a delightful

thing, for it leads to truth--what is offensive is that they lie and

worship their own lying. . . . I respect Porfiry, but . . . What threw

them out at first? The door was locked, and when they came back with

the porter it was open. So it followed that Koch and Pestryakov were

the murderers--that was their logic!"



"But don't excite yourself; they simply detained them, they could not

help that. . . . And, by the way, I've met that man Koch. He used to

buy unredeemed pledges from the old woman? Eh?"



"Yes, he is a swindler. He buys up bad debts, too. He makes a

profession of it. But enough of him! Do you know what makes me angry?

It's their sickening rotten, petrified routine. . . . And this case

might be the means of introducing a new method. One can show from the

psychological data alone how to get on the track of the real man. 'We

have facts,' they say. But facts are not everything--at least half the

business lies in how you interpret them!"



"Can you interpret them, then?"



"Anyway, one can't hold one's tongue when one has a feeling, a

tangible feeling, that one might be a help if only. . . . Eh! Do you

know the details of the case?"



"I am waiting to hear about the painter."



"Oh, yes! Well, here's the story. Early on the third day after the

murder, when they were still dandling Koch and Pestryakov--though they

accounted for every step they took and it was as plain as a pikestaff-

an unexpected fact turned up. A peasant called Dushkin, who keeps a

dram-shop facing the house, brought to the police office a jeweller's

case containing some gold eeard of it till the day before

yesterday.' 'And why didn't you come to the police till now?' 'I was

frightened.' 'And why did you try to hang yourself?' 'From anxiety.'

'What anxiety?' 'That I should be accused of it.' Well, that's the

whole story. And now what do you suppose they deduced from that?"



"Why, there's no supposing. There's a clue, such as it is, a fact. You

wouldn't have your painter set free?"



"Now they've simply taken him for the murderer. They haven't a shadow

of doubt."



"That's nonsense. You are excited. But what about the ear-rings? You

must admit that, if on the very same day and hour ear-rings from the

old woman's box have come into Nikolay's hands, they must have come

there somehow. That's a good deal in such a case."



"How did they get there? How did they get there?" cried Razumihin.

"How can you, a doctor, whose duty it is to study man and who has more

opportunity than anyone else for studying human nature--how can you

fail to see the character of the man in the whole story? Don't you see

at once that the answers he has given in the examination are the holy

truth? They came into his hand precisely as he has told us--he stepped

on the box and picked it up."



"The holy truth! But didn't he own himself that he told a lie at

first?"



"Listen to me, listen attentively. The porter and Koch and Pestryakov

and the other porter and the wife of the first porter and the woman

who was sitting in the porter's lodge and the man Kryukov, who had

just got out of a cab at that minute and went in at the entry with a

lady on his arm, that is eight or ten witnesses, agree that Nikolay

had Dmitri on the ground, was lying on him beating him, while Dmitri

hung on to his hair, beating him, too. They lay right across the way,

blocking the thoroughfare. They were sworn at on all sides while they

'like children' (the very words of the witnesses) were falling over

one another, squealing, fighting and laughing with the funniest faces,

and, chasing one another like children, they ran into the street. Now

take careful note. The bodies upstairs were warm, you understand, warm

when they found them! If they, or Nikolay alone, had murdered them and

broken open the boxes, or simply taken part in the robbery, allow me

to ask you one question: do their state of mind, their squeals and

giggles and childish scuffling at the gate fit in with axes,

bloodshed, fiendish cunning, robbery? They'd just killed them, not

five or ten minutes before, for the bodies were still warm, and at

once, leaving the flat open, knowing that people would go there at

once, flinging away their booty, they rolled about like children,

laughing and attracting general attention. And there are a dozen

witnesses to swear to that!"



"Of course it is strange! It's impossible, indeed, but . . ."



"No, brother, no /buts/. And if the ear-rings being found in Nikolay's

hands at the very day and hour of the murder constitutes an important

piece of circumstantial evidence against him--although the explanation

given by him accounts for it, and therefore it does not tell seriously

against him--one must take into consideration the facts which prove

him innocent, especially as they are facts that /cannot be denied/.

And do you suppose, from the character of our legal system, that they

will accept, or that they are in a position to accept, this fact--

resting simply on a psychological impossibility--as irrefutable and

conclusively breaking down the circumstantial evidence for the

prosecution? No, they won't accept it, they certainly won't, because

they found the jewel-case and the man tried to hang himself, 'which he

could not have done if he hadn't felt guilty.' That's the point,

that's what excites me, you must understand!"



"Oh, I see you are excited! Wait a bit. I forgot to ask you; what

proof is there that the box came from the old woman?"



"That's been proved," said Razumihin with apparent reluctance,

frowning. "Koch recognised the jewel-case and gave the name of the

owner, who proved conclusively that it was his."



"That's bad. Now another point. Did anyone see Nikolay at the time

that Koch and Pestryakov were going upstairs at first, and is there no

evidence about that?"



"Nobody did see him," Razumihin answered with vexation. "That's the

worst of it. Even Koch and Pestryakov did not notice them on their way

upstairs, though, indeed, their evidence could not have been worth

much. They said they saw the flat was open, and that there must be

work going on in it, but they took no special notice and could not

remember whether there actually were men at work in it."



"Hm! . . . So the only evidence for the defence is that they were

beating one another and laughing. That constitutes a strong

presumption, but . . . How do you explain the facts yourself?"



"How do I explain them? What is there to explain? It's clear. At any

rate, the direction in which explanation is to be sought is clear, and

the jewel-case points to it. The real murderer dropped those ear-

rings. The murderer was upstairs, locked in, when Koch and Pestryakov

knocked at the door. Koch, like an ass, did not stay at the door; so

the murderer popped out and ran down, too; for he had no other way of

escape. He hid from Koch, Pestryakov and the porter in the flat when

Nikolay and Dmitri had just run out of it. He stopped there while the

porter and others were going upstairs, waited till they were out of

hearing, and then went calmly downstairs at the very minute when

Dmitri and Nikolay ran out into the street and there was no one in the

entry; possibly he was seen, but not noticed. There are lots of people

going in and out. He must have dropped the ear-rings out of his pocket

when he stood behind the door, and did not notice he dropped them,

because he had other things to think of. The jewel-case is a

conclusive proof that he did stand there. . . . That's how I explain

it."



"Too clever! No, my boy, you're too clever. That beats everything."



"But, why, why?"



"Why, because everything fits too well . . . it's too melodramatic."



"A-ach!" Razumihin was exclaiming, but at that moment the door opened

and a personage came in who was a stranger to all present.







CHAPTER V



This was a gentleman no longer young, of a stiff and portly

appearance, and a cautious and sour countenance. He began by stopping

short in the doorway, staring about him with offensive and undisguised

astonishment, as though asking himself what sort of place he had come

to. Mistrustfully and with an affectation of being alarmed and almost

affronted, he scanned Raskolnikov's low and narrow "cabin." With the

same amazement he stared at Raskolnikov, who lay undressed,

dishevelled, unwashed, on his miserable dirty sofa, looking fixedly at

him. Then with the same deliberation he scrutinised the uncouth,

unkempt figure and unshaven face of Razumihin, who looked him boldly

and inquiringly in the face without rising from his seat. A

constrained silence lasted for a couple of minutes, and then, as might

be expected, some scene-shifting took place. Reflecting, probably from

certain fairly unmistakable signs, that he would get nothing in this

"cabin" by attempting to overawe them, the gentleman softened

somewhat, and civilly, though with some severity, emphasising every

syllable of his question, addressed Zossimov:



"Rodion Romanovitch Raskolnikov, a student, or formerly a student?"



Zossimov made a slight movement, and would have answered, had not

Razumihin anticipated him.



"Here he is lying on the sofa! What do you want?"



This familiar "what do you want" seemed to cut the ground from the

feet of the pompous gentleman. He was turning to Razumihin, but

checked himself in time and turned to Zossimov again.



"This is Raskolnikov," mumbled Zossimov, nodding towards him. Then he

gave a prolonged yawn, opening his mouth as wide as possible. Then he

lazily put his hand into his waistcoat-pocket, pulled out a huge gold

watch in a round hunter's case, opened it, looked at it and as slowly

and lazily proceeded to put it back.



Ras . . A very nice young man and advanced. I like to meet young people:

one learns new things from them." Luzhin looked round hopefully at

them all.



"How do you mean?" asked Razumihin.



"In the most serious and essential matters," Pyotr Petrovitch replied,

as though delighted at the question. "You see, it's ten years since I

visited Petersburg. All the novelties, reforms, ideas have reached us

in the provinces, but to see it all more clearly one must be in

Petersburg. And it's my notion that you observe and learn most by

watching the younger generation. And I confess I am delighted . . ."



"At what?"



"Your question is a wide one. I may be mistaken, but I fancy I find

clearer views, more, so to say, criticism, more practicality . . ."



"That's true," Zossimov let drop.



"Nonsense! There's no practicality." Razumihin flew at him.

"Practicality is a difficult thing to find; it does not drop down from

heaven. And for the last two hundred years we have been divorced from

all practical life. Ideas, if you like, are fermenting," he said to

Pyotr Petrovitch, "and desire for good exists, though it's in a

childish form, and honesty you may find, although there are crowds of

brigands. Anyway, there's no practicality. Practicality goes well

shod."



"I don't agree with you," Pyotr Petrovitch replied, with evident

enjoyment. "Of course, people do get carried away and make mistakes,

but one must have indulgence; those mistakes are merely evidence of

enthusiasm for the cause and of abnormal external environment. If

little has been done, the time has been but short; of means I will not

speak. It's my personal view, if you care to know, that something has

been accomplished already. New valuable ideas, new valuable works are

circulating in the place of our old dreamy and romantic authors.

Literature is taking a maturer form, many injurious prejudice have

been rooted up and turned into ridicule. . . . In a word, we have cut

ourselves off irrevocably from the past, and that, to my thinking, is

a great thing . . ."



"He's learnt it by heart to show off!" Raskolnikov pronounced

suddenly.



"What?" asked Pyotr Petrovitch, not catching his words; but he

received no reply.



"That's all true," Zossimov hastened to interpose.



"Isn't it so?" Pyotr Petrovitch went on, glancing affably at Zossimov.

"You must admit," he went on, addressing Razumihin with a shade of

triumph and superciliousness--he almost added "young man"--"that there

is an advance, or, as they say now, progress in the name of science

and economic truth . . ."



"A commonplace."



"No, not a commonplace! Hitherto, for instance, if I were told, 'love

thy neighbour,' what came of it?" Pyotr Petrovitch went on, perhaps

with excessive haste. "It came to my tearing my coat in half to share

with my neighbour and we both were left half naked. As a Russian

proverb has it, 'Catch several hares and you won't catch one.' Science

now tells us, love yourself before all men, for everything in the

world rests on self-interest. You love yourself and manage your own

affairs properly and your coat remains whole. Economic truth adds that

the better private affairs are organised in society--the more whole

coats, so to say--the firmer are its foundations and the better is the

common welfare organised too. Therefore, in acquiring wealth solely

and exclusively for myself, I am acquiring, so to speak, for all, and

helping to bring to pass my neighbour's getting a little more than a

torn coat; and that not from private, personal liberality, but as a

consequence of the general advance. The idea is simple, but unhappily

it has been a long time reaching us, being hindered by idealism and

sentimentality. And yet it would seem to want very little wit to

perceive it . . ."



"Excuse me, I've very little wit myself," Razumihin cut in sharply,

"and so let us drop it. I began this discussion with an object, but

I've grown so sick during the last three years of this chattering to

amuse oneself, of this incessant flow of commonplaces, always the

same, that, by Jove, I blush even when other people talk like that.

You are in a hurry, no doubt, to exhibit your acquirements; and I

don't blame you, that's quite pardonable. I only wanted to find out

what sort of man you are, for so many unscrupulous people have got

hold of the progressive cause of late and have so distorted in their

own interests everything they touched, that the whole cause has been

dragged in the mire. That's enough!"



"Excuse me, sir," said Luzhin, affronted, and speaking with excessive

dignity. "Do you mean to suggest so unceremoniously that I too . . ."



"Oh, my dear sir . . . how could I? . . . Come, that's enough,"

Razumihin concluded, and he turned abruptly to Zossimov to continue

their previous conversation.



Pyotr Petrovitch had the good sense to accept the disavowal. He made

up his mind to take leave in another minute or two.



"I trust our acquaintance," he said, addressing Raskolnikov, "may,

upon your recovery and in view of the circumstances of which you are

aware, become closer . . . Above all, I hope for your return to

health . . ."



Raskolnikov did not even turn his head. Pyotr Petrovitch began getting

up from his chair.



"One of her customers must have killed her," Zossimov declared

positively.



"Not a doubt of it," replied Razumihin. "Porfiry doesn't give his

opinion, but is examining all who have left pledges with her there."



"Examining them?" Raskolnikov asked aloud.



"Yes. What then?"



"Nothing."



"How does he get hold of them?" asked Zossimov.



"Koch has given the names of some of them, other names are on the

wrappers of the pledges and some have come forward of themselves."



"It must have been a cunning and practised ruffian! The boldness of

it! The coolness!"



"That's just what it wasn't!" interposed Razumihin. "That's what

throws you all off the scent. But I maintain that he is not cunning,

not practised, and probably this was his first crime! The supposition

that it was a calculated crime and a cunning criminal doesn't work.

Suppose him to have been inexperienced, and it's clear that it was

only a chance that saved him--and chance may do anything. Why, he did

not foresee obstacles, perhaps! And how did he set to work? He took

jewels worth ten or twenty roubles, stuffing his pockets with them,

ransacked the old woman's trunks, her rags--and they found fifteen

hundred roubles, besides notes, in a box in the top drawer of the

chest! He did not know how to rob; he could only murder. It was his

first crime, I assure you, his first crime; he lost his head. And he

got off more by luck than good counsel!"



"You are talking of the murder of the old pawnbroker, I believe?"

Pyotr Petrovitch put in, addressing Zossimov. He was standing, hat and

gloves in hand, but before departing he felt disposed to throw off a

few more intellectual phrases. He was evidently anxious to make a

favourable impression and his vanity overcame his prudence.



"Yes. You've heard of it?"



"Oh, yes, being in the neighbourhood."



"Do you know the details?"



"I can't say that; but another circumstance interests me in the case--

the whole question, so to say. Not to speak of the fact that crime has

been greatly on the increase among the lower classes during the last

five years, not to speak of the cases of robbery and arson everywhere,

what strikes me as the strangest thing is that in the higher classes,

too, crime is increasing proportionately. In one place one hears of a

student's robbing the mail on the high road; in another place people

of good social position forge false banknotes; in Moscow of late a

whole gang has been captured who used to forge lottery tickets, and

one of the ringleaders was a lecturer in universal history; then our

secretary abroad was murdered from some obscure motive of gain. . . .

And if this old woman, the pawnbroker, has been murdered by someone

of a higher class in society--for peasants don't pawn gold trinkets--

how are we to explain this demoralisation of the civilised part of our

society?"



"shook with nervous impatience as he turned the

sheets. Suddenly someone sat down beside him at his table. He looked

up, it was the head clerk Zametov, looking just the same, with the

rings on his fingers and the watch-chain, with the curly, black hair,

parted and pomaded, with the smart waistcoat, rather shabby coat and

doubtful linen. He was in a good humour, at least he was smiling very

gaily and good-humouredly. His dark face was rather flushed from the

champagne he had drunk.



"What, you here?" he began in surprise, speaking as though he'd known

him all his life. "Why, Razumihin told me only yesterday you were

unconscious. How strange! And do you know I've been to see you?"



Raskolnikov knew he would come up to him. He laid aside the papers and

turned to Zametov. There was a smile on his lips, and a new shade of

irritable impatience was apparent in that smile.



"I know you have," he answered. "I've heard it. You looked for my

sock. . . . And you know Razumihin has lost his heart to you? He says

you've been with him to Luise Ivanovna's--you know, the woman you

tried to befriend, for whom you winked to the Explosive Lieutenant and

he would not understand. Do you remember? How could he fail to

understand--it was quite clear, wasn't it?"



"What a hot head he is!"



"The explosive one?"



"No, your friend Razumihin."



"You must have a jolly life, Mr. Zametov; entrance free to the most

agreeable places. Who's been pouring champagne into you just now?"



"We've just been . . . having a drink together. . . . You talk about

pouring it into me!"



"By way of a fee! You profit by everything!" Raskolnikov laughed,

"it's all right, my dear boy," he added, slapping Zametov on the

shoulder. "I am not speaking from temper, but in a friendly way, for

sport, as that workman of yours said when he was scuffling with

Dmitri, in the case of the old woman. . . ."



"How do you know about it?"



"Perhaps I know more about it than you do."



"How strange you are. . . . I am sure you are still very unwell. You

oughtn't to have come out."



"Oh, do I seem strange to you?"



"Yes. What are you doing, reading the papers?"



"Yes."



"There's a lot about the fires."



"No, I am not reading about the fires." Here he looked mysteriously at

Zametov; his lips were twisted again in a mocking smile. "No, I am not

reading about the fires," he went on, winking at Zametov. "But confess

now, my dear fellow, you're awfully anxious to know what I am reading

about?"



"I am not in the least. Mayn't I ask a question? Why do you keep

on . . . ?"



"Listen, you are a man of culture and education?"



"I was in the sixth class at the gymnasium," said Zametov with some

dignity.



"Sixth class! Ah, my cock-sparrow! With your parting and your rings--

you are a gentleman of fortune. Foo! what a charming boy!" Here

Raskolnikov broke into a nervous laugh right in Zametov's face. The

latter drew back, more amazed than offended.



"Foo! how strange you are!" Zametov repeated very seriously. "I can't

help thinking you are still delirious."



"I am delirious? You are fibbing, my cock-sparrow! So I am strange?

You find me curious, do you?"



"Yes, curious."



"Shall I tell you what I was reading about, what I was looking for?

See what a lot of papers I've made them bring me. Suspicious, eh?"



"Well, what is it?"



"You prick up your ears?"



"How do you mean--'prick up my ears'?"



"I'll explain that afterwards, but now, my boy, I declare to you . . .

no, better 'I confess' . . . No, that's not right either; 'I make a

deposition and you take it.' I depose that I was reading, that I was

looking and searching. . . ." he screwed up his eyes and paused. "I

was searching--and came here on purpose to do it--for news of the

murder of the old pawnbroker woman," he articulated at last, almost in

a whisper, bringing his face exceedingly close to the face of Zametov.

Zametov looked at him steadily, without moving or drawing his face

away. What struck Zametov afterwards as the strangest part of it all

was that silence followed for exactly a minute, and that they gazed at

one another all the while.



"What if you have been reading about it?" he cried at last, perplexed

and impatient. "That's no business of mine! What of it?"



"The same old woman," Raskolnikov went on in the same whisper, not

heeding Zametov's explanation, "about whom you were talking in the

police-office, you remember, when I fainted. Well, do you understand

now?"



"What do you mean? Understand . . . what?" Zametov brought out, almost

alarmed.



Raskolnikov's set and earnest face was suddenly transformed, and he

suddenly went off into the same nervous laugh as before, as though

utterly unable to restrain himself. And in one flash he recalled with

extraordinary vividness of sensation a moment in the recent past, that

moment when he stood with the axe behind the door, while the latch

trembled and the men outside swore and shook it, and he had a sudden

desire to shout at them, to swear at them, to put out his tongue at

them, to mock them, to laugh, and laugh, and laugh!



"You are either mad, or . . ." began Zametov, and he broke off, as

though stunned by the idea that had suddenly flashed into his mind.



"Or? Or what? What? Come, tell me!"



"Nothing," said Zametov, getting angry, "it's all nonsense!"



Both were silent. After his sudden fit of laughter Raskolnikov became

suddenly thoughtful and melancholy. He put his elbow on the table and

leaned his head on his hand. He seemed to have completely forgotten

Zametov. The silence lasted for some time.



"Why don't you drink your tea? It's getting cold," said Zametov.



"What! Tea? Oh, yes. . . ." Raskolnikov sipped the glass, put a morsel

of bread in his mouth and, suddenly looking at Zametov, seemed to

remember everything and pulled himself together. At the same moment

his face resumed its original mocking expression. He went on drinking

tea.



"There have been a great many of these crimes lately," said Zametov.

"Only the other day I read in the /Moscow News/ that a whole gang of

false coiners had been caught in Moscow. It was a regular society.

They used to forge tickets!"



"Oh, but it was a long time ago! I read about it a month ago,"

Raskolnikov answered calmly. "So you consider them criminals?" he

added, smiling.



"Of course they are criminals."



"They? They are children, simpletons, not criminals! Why, half a

hundred people meeting for such an object--what an idea! Three would

be too many, and then they want to have more faith in one another than

in themselves! One has only to blab in his cups and it all collapses.

Simpletons! They engaged untrustworthy people to change the notes--

what a thing to trust to a casual stranger! Well, let us suppose that

these simpletons succeed and each makes a million, and what follows

for the rest of their lives? Each is dependent on the others for the

rest of his life! Better hang oneself at once! And they did not know

how to change the notes either; the man who changed the notes took

five thousand roubles, and his hands trembled. He counted the first

four thousand, but did not count the fifth thousand--he was in such a

hurry to get the money into his pocket and run away. Of course he

roused suspicion. And the whole thing came to a crash through one

fool! Is it possible?"



"That his hands trembled?" observed Zametov, "yes, that's quite

possible. That, I feel quite sure, is possible. Sometimes one can't

stand things."



"Can't stand that?"



"Why, could you stand it then? No, I couldn't. For the sake of a

hundred roubles to face such a terrible experience? To go with false

notes into a bank where it's their business to spot that sort of

thing! No, I should not have the face to do it. Would you?"



Raskolnikov had an intense desire again "to put his tongue out."

Shivers kept running down his spine.



"I should do it quite differently," Raskolnikov began. "This is how I

would change the notes: I'd count the first thousand three or four

times backwards and forwards, looking at every note and then I'd set
I may be mean, only let me be, for

God's sake, let me be! Let me be, let me be!"



He began calmly, gloating beforehand over the venomous phrases he was

about to utter, but finished, panting for breath, in a frenzy, as he

had been with Luzhin.



Razumihin stood a moment, thought and let his hand drop.



"Well, go to hell then," he said gently and thoughtfully. "Stay," he

roared, as Raskolnikov was about to move. "Listen to me. Let me tell

you, that you are all a set of babbling, posing idiots! If you've any

little trouble you brood over it like a hen over an egg. And you are

plagiarists even in that! There isn't a sign of independent life in

you! You are made of spermaceti ointment and you've lymph in your

veins instead of blood. I don't believe in anyone of you! In any

circumstances the first thing for all of you is to be unlike a human

being! Stop!" he cried with redoubled fury, noticing that Raskolnikov

was again making a movement--"hear me out! You know I'm having a

house-warming this evening, I dare say they've arrived by now, but I

left my uncle there--I just ran in--to receive the guests. And if you

weren't a fool, a common fool, a perfect fool, if you were an original

instead of a translation . . . you see, Rodya, I recognise you're a

clever fellow, but you're a fool!--and if you weren't a fool you'd

come round to me this evening instead of wearing out your boots in the

street! Since you have gone out, there's no help for it! I'd give you

a snug easy chair, my landlady has one . . . a cup of tea, company.

. . . Or you could lie on the sofa--any way you would be with us.

. . . Zossimov will be there too. Will you come?"



"No."



"R-rubbish!" Razumihin shouted, out of patience. "How do you know? You

can't answer for yourself! You don't know anything about it. . . .

Thousands of times I've fought tooth and nail with people and run back

to them afterwards. . . . One feels ashamed and goes back to a man! So

remember, Potchinkov's house on the third storey. . . ."



"Why, Mr. Razumihin, I do believe you'd let anybody beat you from

sheer benevolence."



"Beat? Whom? Me? I'd twist his nose off at the mere idea! Potchinkov's

house, 47, Babushkin's flat. . . ."



"I shall not come, Razumihin." Raskolnikov turned and walked away.



"I bet you will," Razumihin shouted after him. "I refuse to know you

if you don't! Stay, hey, is Zametov in there?"



"Yes."



"Did you see him?"



"Yes."



"Talked to him?"



"Yes."



"What about? Confound you, don't tell me then. Potchinkov's house, 47,

Babushkin's flat, remember!"



Raskolnikov walked on and turned the corner into Sadovy Street.

Razumihin looked after him thoughtfully. Then with a wave of his hand

he went into the house but stopped short of the stairs.



"Confound it," he went on almost aloud. "He talked sensibly but yet

. . . I am a fool! As if madmen didn't talk sensibly! And this was

just what Zossimov seemed afraid of." He struck his finger on his

forehead. "What if . . . how could I let him go off alone? He may

drown himself. . . . Ach, what a blunder! I can't." And he ran back to

overtake Raskolnikov, but there was no trace of him. With a curse he

returned with rapid steps to the Palais de Cristal to question

Zametov.



Raskolnikov walked straight to X---- Bridge, stood in the middle, and

leaning both elbows on the rail stared into the distance. On parting

with Razumihin, he felt so much weaker that he could scarcely reach

this place. He longed to sit or lie down somewhere in the street.

Bending over the water, he gazed mechanically at the last pink flush

of the sunset, at the row of houses growing dark in the gathering

twilight, at one distant attic window on the left bank, flashing as

though on fire in the last rays of the setting sun, at the darkening

water of the canal, and the water seemed to catch his attention. At

last red circles flashed before his eyes, the houses seemed moving,

the passers-by, the canal banks, the carriages, all danced before his

eyes. Suddenly he started, saved again perhaps from swooning by an

uncanny and hideous sight. He became aware of someone standing on the

right side of him; he looked and saw a tall woman with a kerchief on

her head, with a long, yellow, wasted face and red sunken eyes. She

was looking straight at him, but obviously she saw nothing and

recognised no one. Suddenly she leaned her right hand on the parapet,

lifted her right leg over the railing, then her left and threw herself

into the canal. The filthy water parted and swallowed up its victim

for a moment, but an instant later the drowning woman floated to the

surface, moving slowly with the current, her head and legs in the

water, her skirt inflated like a balloon over her back.



"A woman drowning! A woman drowning!" shouted dozens of voices; people

ran up, both banks were thronged with spectators, on the bridge people

crowded about Raskolnikov, pressing up behind him.



"Mercy on it! it's our Afrosinya!" a woman cried tearfully close by.

"Mercy! save her! kind people, pull her out!"



"A boat, a boat" was shouted in the crowd. But there was no need of a

boat; a policeman ran down the steps to the canal, threw off his great

coat and his boots and rushed into the water. It was easy to reach

her: she floated within a couple of yards from the steps, he caught

hold of her clothes with his right hand and with his left seized a

pole which a comrade held out to him; the drowning woman was pulled

out at once. They laid her on the granite pavement of the embankment.

She soon recovered consciousness, raised her head, sat up and began

sneezing and coughing, stupidly wiping her wet dress with her hands.

She said nothing.



"She's drunk herself out of her senses," the same woman's voice wailed

at her side. "Out of her senses. The other day she tried to hang

herself, we cut her down. I ran out to the shop just now, left my

little girl to look after her--and here she's in trouble again! A

neighbour, gentleman, a neighbour, we live close by, the second house

from the end, see yonder. . . ."



The crowd broke up. The police still remained round the woman, someone

mentioned the police station. . . . Raskolnikov looked on with a

strange sensation of indifference and apathy. He felt disgusted. "No,

that's loathsome . . . water . . . it's not good enough," he muttered

to himself. "Nothing will come of it," he added, "no use to wait. What

about the police office . . . ? And why isn't Zametov at the police

office? The police office is open till ten o'clock. . . ." He turned

his back to the railing and looked about him.



"Very well then!" he said resolutely; he moved from the bridge and

walked in the direction of the police office. His heart felt hollow

and empty. He did not want to think. Even his depression had passed,

there was not a trace now of the energy with which he had set out "to

make an end of it all." Complete apathy had succeeded to it.



"Well, it's a way out of it," he thought, walking slowly and

listlessly along the canal bank. "Anyway I'll make an end, for I want

to. . . . But is it a way out? What does it matter! There'll be the

square yard of space--ha! But what an end! Is it really the end? Shall

I tell them or not? Ah . . . damn! How tired I am! If I could find

somewhere to sit or lie down soon! What I am most ashamed of is its

being so stupid. But I don't care about that either! What idiotic

ideas come into one's head."



To reach the police office he had to go straight forward and take the

second turning to the left. It was only a few paces away. But at the

first turning he stopped and, after a minute's thought, turned into a

side street and went two streets out of his way, possibly without any

object, or possibly to delay a minute and gain time. He walked,

looking at the ground; suddenly someone seemed to whisper in his ear;

he lifted his head and saw that he was standing at the very gate of

/the/ house. He had not passed it, he had not been near it since

/that/ evening. An overwhelming, unaccountable prompting drew him on.

He went into the house, passed through the gateway, then into the

first entrance on the right, and began mounting the familiar staircase

to the fourth storey. The narrow, steep staircase was very dark. He

stopped at each landing and looked round him with curiosity; on the

first landing the framework of the window had been taken out. "That

wasn't so then," he thought. Here was the flat on the second storey

where Nikolay and Dmitri had been working. "It's shut up and the door

newly painted. So it's to let." Then the third storey and the fourth.

"Here!" He was perplexed to find the door of the flat wide open. There

were men there, he could hear voices; he had not expected that. After

brief hesitation he mounted the last stairs and went into the flat.

It, too, was being done up; there were workmen in it. This seemed to

amaze him; he somehow fancied that he would find everything as he left

it, even perhaps the corpses in the same places on the floor. And now,

bare walls, no furniture; it seemed strange. He walked to the window

and sat down on the window-sill. There were two workmen, both young

fellows, but one much younger than the other. They were papering the

walls with a new white paper covered with lilac flowers, instead of

the old, dirty, yellow one. Raskolnikov for some reason felt horribly

annoyed by this. He looked at the new paper with dislike, as though he

felt sorry to have it all so changed. The workmen had obviously stayed

beyond their time and now they were hurriedly rolling up their paper

and getting ready to go home. They took no notice of Raskolnikov's

coming in; they were talking. Raskolnikov folded his arms and

listened.



"She comes to me in the morning," said the elder to the younger, "very

early, all dressed up. 'Why are you preening and prinking?' says I. 'I

am ready to do anything to please you, Tit Vassilitch!' That's a way

of going on! And she dressed up like a regular fashion book!"



"And what is a fashion book?" the younger one asked. He obviously

regarded the other as an authority.



"A fashion book is a lot of pictures, coloured, and they come to the

tailors here every Saturday, by post from abroad, to show folks how to

dress, the male sex as well as the female. They're pictures. The

gentlemen are generally wearing fur coats and for the ladies'

fluffles, they're beyond anything you can fancy."



"There's nothing you can't find in Petersburg," the younger cried

enthusiastically, "except father and mother, there's everything!"



"Except them, there's everything to be found, my boy," the elder

declared sententiously.



Raskolnikov got up and walked into the other room where the strong

box, the bed, and the chest of drawers had been; the room seemed to

him very tiny without furniture in it. The paper was the same; the

paper in the corner showed where the case of ikons had stood. He

looked at it and went to the window. The elder workman looked at him

askance.



"What do you want?" he asked suddenly.



Instead of answering Raskolnikov went into the passage and pulled the

bell. The same bell, the same cracked note. He rang it a second and a

third time; he listened and remembered. The hideous and agonisingly

fearful sensation he had felt then began to come back more and more

vividly. He shuddered at every ring and it gave him more and more

satisfaction.



"Well, what do you want? Who are you?" the workman shouted, going out

to him. Raskolnikov went inside again.



"I want to take a flat," he said. "I am looking round."



"It's not the time to look at rooms at night! and you ought to come up

with the porter."



"The floors have been washed, will they be painted?" Raskolnikov went

on. "Is there no blood?"



"What blood?"



"Why, the old woman and her sister were murdered here. There was a

perfect pool there."



"But who are you?" the workman cried, uneasy.



"Who am I?"



"Yes."



"You want to know? Come to the police station, I'll tell you."



The workmen looked at him in amazement.



"It's time for us to go, we are late. Come along, Alyoshka. We must

lock up," said the elder workman.



"Very well, come along," said Raskolnikov indifferently, and going out

first, he went slowly downstairs. "Hey, porter," he cried in the

gateway.



At the entrance several people were standing, staring at the passers-

by; the two porters, a peasant woman, a man in a long coat and a few

others. Raskolnikov went straight up to them.



"What do you want?" asked one of the porters.



"Have you been to the police office?"



"I've just been there. What do you want?"



"Is it open?"



"Of course."



"Is the assistant there?"



"He was there for a time. What do you want?"



Raskolnikov made no reply, but stood beside them lost in thought.



"He's been to look at the flat," said the elder workman, coming

forward.



"Which flat?"



"Where we are at work. 'Why have you washed away the blood?' says he.

'There has been a murder here,' says he, 'and I've come to take it.'

And he began ringing at the bell, all but broke it. 'Come to the

police station,' says he. 'I'll tell you everything there.' He

wouldn't leave us."



The porter looked at Raskolnikov, frowning and perplexed.



"Who are you?" he shouted as impressively as he could.



"I am Rodion Romanovitch Raskolnikov, formerly a student, I live in

Shil's house, not far from here, flat Number 14, ask the porter, he

knows me." Raskolnikov said all this in a lazy, dreamy voice, not

turning round, but looking intently into the darkening street.



"Why have you been to the flat?"



"To look at it."



"What is there to look at?"



"Take him straight to the police station," the man in the long coat

jerked in abruptly.



Raskolnikov looked intently at him over his shoulder and said in the

same slow, lazy tones:



"Come along."



"Yes, take him," the man went on more confidently. "Why was he going

into /that/, what's in his mind, eh?"



"He's not drunk, but God knows what's the matter with him," muttered

the workman.



"But what do you want?" the porter shouted again, beginning to get

angry in earnest--"Why are you hanging about?"



"You funk the police station then?" said Raskolnikov jeeringly.



"How funk it? Why are you hanging about?"



"He's a rogue!" shouted the peasant woman.



"Why waste time talking to him?" cried the other porter, a huge

peasant in a full open coat and with keys on his belt. "Get along! He

is a rogue and no mistake. Get along!"



And seizing Raskolnikov by the shoulder he flung him into the street.

He lurched forward, but recovered his footing, looked at the

spectators in silence and walked away.



"Strange man!" observed the workman.



"There are strange folks about nowadays," said the woman.



"You should have taken him to the police station all the same," said

the man in the long coat.



"Better have nothing to do with him," decided the big porter. "A

regular rogue! Just what he wants, you may be sure, but once take him

up, you won't get rid of him. . . . We know the sort!"



"Shall I go there or not?" thought Raskolnikov, standing in the middle

of the thoroughfare at the cross-roads, and he looked about him, as

though expecting from someone a decisive word. But no sound came, all

was dead and silent like the stones on which he walked, dead to him,

to him alone. . . . All at once at the end of the street, two hundred

yards away, in the gathering dusk he saw a crowd and heard talk and

shouts. In the middle of the crowd stood a carriage. . . . A light

gleamed in the middle of the street. "What is it?" Raskolnikov turned

to the right and went up to the crowd. He seemed to clutch at

everything and smiled coldly when he recognised it, for he had fully

made up his mind to go to the police station and knew that it would

all soon be over.







CHAPTER VII



An elegant carriage stood in the middle of the road with a pair of

spirited grey horses; there was no one in it, and the coachman had got

off his box and stood by; the horses were being held by the bridle.

. . . A mass of people had gathered round, the police standing in

front. One of them held a lighted lantern which he was turning on

something lying close to the wheels. Everyone was talking, shouting,

exclaiming; the coachman seemed at a loss and kept repeating:



"What a misfortune! Good Lord, what a misfortune!"



Raskolnikov pushed his way in as far as he could, and succeeded at

last in seeing the object of the commotion and interest. On the ground

a man who had been run over lay apparently unconscious, and covered

with blood; he was very badly dressed, but not like a workman. Blood

was flowing from his head and face; his face was crushed, mutilated

and disfigured. He was evidently badly injured.



"Merciful heaven!" wailed the coachman, "what more could I do? If I'd

been driving fast or had not shouted to him, but I was going quietly,

not in a hurry. Everyone could see I was going along just like

everybody else. A drunken man can't walk straight, we all know. . . .

I saw him crossing the street, staggering and almost falling. I

shouted again and a second and a third time, then I held the horses

in, but he fell straight under their feet! Either he did it on purpose

or he was very tipsy. . . . The horses are young and ready to take

fright . . . they started, he screamed . . . that made them worse.

That's how it happened!"



"That's just how it was," a voice in the crowd confirmed.



"He shouted, that's true, he shouted three times," another voice

declared.



"Three times it was, we all heard it," shouted a third.



But the coachman was not very much distressed and frightened. It was

evident that the carriage belonged to a rich and important person who

was awaiting it somewhere; the police, of course, were in no little

anxiety to avoid upsetting his arrangements. All they had to do was to

take the injured man to the police station and the hospital. No one

knew his name.



Meanwhile Raskolnikov had squeezed in and stooped closer over him. The

lantern suddenly lighted up the unfortunate man's face. He recognised

him.



"I know him! I know him!" he shouted, pushing to the front. "It's a

government clerk retired from the service, Marmeladov. He lives close

by in Kozel's house. . . . Make haste for a doctor! I will pay, see?"

He pulled money out of his pocket and showed it to the policeman. He

was in violent agitation.



The police were glad that they had found out who the man was.

Raskolnikov gave his own name and address, and, as earnestly as if it

had been his father, he besought the police to carry the unconscious

Marmeladov to his lodging at once.



"Just here, three houses away," he said eagerly, "the house belongs to

Kozel, a rich German. He was going home, no doubt drunk. I know him,

he is a drunkard. He has a family there, a wife, children, he has one

daughter. . . . It will take time to take him to the hospital, and

there is sure to be a doctor in the house. I'll pay, I'll pay! At

least he will be looked after at home . . . they will help him at

once. But he'll die before you get him to the hospital." He managed to

slip something unseen into the policeman's hand. But the thing was

straightforward and legitimate, and in any case help was closer here.

They raised the injured man; people volunteered to help.



Kozel's house was thirty yards away. Raskolnikov walked behind,

carefully holding Marmeladov's head and showing the way.



"This way, this way! We must take him upstairs head foremost. Turn

round! I'll pay, I'll make it worth your while," he muttered.



Katerina Ivanovna had just begun, as she always did at every free

moment, walking to and fro in her little room from window to stove and

back again, with her arms folded across her chest, talking to herself

and coughing. Of late she had begun to talk more than ever to her

eldest girl, Polenka, a child of ten, who, though there was much she

did not understand, understood very well that her mother needed her,

and so always watched her with her big clever eyes and strove her

utmost to appear to understand. This time Polenka was undressing her

little brother, who had been unwell all day and was going to bed. The

boy was waiting for her to take off his shirt, which had to be washed

at night. He was sitting straight and motionless on a chair, with a

silent, serious face, with his legs stretched out straight before him

--heels together and toes turned out.



He was listening to what his mother was saying to his sister, sitting

perfectly still with pouting lips and wide-open eyes, just as all good

little boys have to sit when they are undressed to go to bed. A little

girl, still younger, dressed literally in rags, stood at the screen,

waiting for her turn. The door on to the stairs was open to relieve

them a little from the clouds of tobacco smoke which floated in from

the other rooms and brought on long terrible fits of coughing in the

poor, consumptive woman. Katerina Ivanovna seemed to have grown even

thinner during that week and the hectic flush on her face was brighter

than ever.



"You wouldn't believe, you can't imagine, Polenka," she said, walking

about the room, "what a happy luxurious life we had in my papa's house

and how this drunkard has brought me, and will bring you all, to ruin!

Papa was a civil colonel and only a step from being a governor; so

that everyone who came to see him said, 'We look upon you, Ivan

Mihailovitch, as our governor!' When I . . . when . . ." she coughed

violently, "oh, cursed life," she cried, clearing her throat and

pressing her hands to her breast, "when I . . . when at the last ball

. . . at the marshal's . . . Princess Bezzemelny saw me--who gave me

the blessing when your father and I were married, Polenka--she asked

at once 'Isn't that the pretty girl who danced the shawl dance at the

breaking-up?' (You must mend that tear, you must take your needle and

darn it as I showed you, or to-morrow--cough, cough, cough--he will

make the hole bigger," she articulated with effort.) "Prince

Schegolskoy, a kammerjunker, had just come from Petersburg then . . .

he danced the mazurka with me and wanted to make me an offer next day;

but I thanked him in flattering expressions and told him that my heart

had long been another's. That other was your father, Polya; papa was

fearfully angry. . . . Is the water ready? Give me the shirt, and the

stockings! Lida," said she to the youngest one, "you must manage

without your chemise to-night . . . and lay your stockings out with it

. . . I'll wash them together. . . . How is it that drunken vagabond

doesn't come in? He has worn his shirt till it looks like a dish-

clout, he has torn it to rags! I'd do it all together, so as not to

have to work two nights running! Oh, dear! (Cough, cough, cough,

cough!) Again! What's this?" she cried, noticing a crowd in the

passage and the men, who were pushing into her room, carrying a

burden. "What is it? What are they bringing? Mercy on us!"



"Where are we to put him?" asked the policeman, looking round when

Marmeladov, unconscious and covered with blood, had been carried in.



"On the sofa! Put him straight on the sofa, with his head this way,"

Raskolnikov showed him.



"Run over in the road! Drunk!" someone shouted in the passage.



Katerina Ivanovna stood, turning white and gasping for breath. The

children were terrified. Little Lida screamed, rushed to Polenka and

clutched at her, trembling all over.



Having laid Marmeladov down, Raskolnikov flew to Katerina Ivanovna.



"For God's sake be calm, don't be frightened!" he said, speaking

quickly, "he was crossing the road and was run over by a carriage,

don't be frightened, he will come to, I told them bring him here . . .

I've been here already, you remember? He will come to; I'll pay!"



"He's done it this time!" Katerina Ivanovna cried despairingly and she

rushed to her husband.



Raskolnikov noticed at once that she was not one of those women who

swoon easily. She instantly placed under the luckless man's head a

pillow, which no one had thought of and began undressing and examining

him. She kept her head, forgetting herself, biting her trembling lips

and stifling the screams which were ready to break from her.



Raskolnikov meanwhile induced someone to run for a doctor. There was

a doctor, it appeared, next door but one.



"I've sent for a doctor," he kept assuring Katerina Ivanovna, "don't

be uneasy, I'll pay. Haven't you water? . . . and give me a napkin or

a towel, anything, as quick as you can. . . . He is injured, but not

killed, believe me. . . . We shall see what the doctor says!"



Katerina Ivanovna ran to the window; there, on a broken chair in the

corner, a large earthenware basin full of water had been stood, in

readiness for washing her children's and husband's linen that night.

This washing was done by Katerina Ivanovna at night at least twice a

week, if not oftener. For the family had come to such a pass that they

were practically without change of linen, and Katerina Ivanovna could

not endure uncleanliness and, rather than see dirt in the house, she

preferred to wear herself out at night, working beyond her strength

when the rest were asleep, so as to get the wet linen hung on a line

and dry by the morning. She took up the basin of water at

Raskolnikov's request, but almost fell down with her burden. But the

latter had already succeeded in finding a towel, wetted it and began

washing the blood off Marmeladov's face.



Katerina Ivanovna stood by, breathing painfully and pressing her hands

to her breast. She was in need of attention herself. Raskolnikov began

to realise that he might have made a mistake in having the injured man

brought here. The policeman, too, stood in hesitation.



"Polenka," cried Katerina Ivanovna, "run to Sonia, make haste. If you

don't find her at home, leave word that her father has been run over

and that she is to come here at once . . . when she comes in. Run,

Polenka! there, put on the shawl."



"Run your fastest!" cried the little boy on the chair suddenly, after

which he relapsed into the same dumb rigidity, with round eyes, his

heels thrust forward and his toes spread out.



Meanwhile the room had become so full of people that you couldn't have

dropped a pin. The policemen left, all except one, who remained for a

time, trying to drive out the people who came in from the stairs.

Almost all Madame Lippevechsel's lodgers had streamed in from the

inner rooms of the flat; at first they were squeezed together in the

doorway, but afterwards they overflowed into the room. Katerina

Ivanovna flew into a fury.



"You might let him die in peace, at least," she shouted at the crowd,

"is it a spectacle for you to gape at? With cigarettes! (Cough, cough,

cough!) You might as well keep your hats on. . . . And there is one in

his hat! . . . Get away! You should respect the dead, at least!"



Her cough choked her--but her reproaches were not without result. They

evidently stood in some awe of Katerina Ivanovna. The lodgers, one

after another, squeezed back into the doorway with that strange inner

feeling of satisfaction which may be observed in the presence of a

sudden accident, even in those nearest and dearest to the victim, from

which no living man is exempt, even in spite of the sincerest sympathy

and compassion.



Voices outside were heard, however, speaking of the hospital and

saying that they'd no business to make a disturbance here.



"No business to die!" cried Katerina Ivanovna, and she was rushing to

the door to vent her wrath upon them, but in the doorway came face to

face with Madame Lippevechsel who had only just heard of the accident

and ran in to restore order. She was a particularly quarrelsome and

irresponsible German.



"Ah, my God!" she cried, clasping her hands, "your husband drunken

horses have trampled! To the hospital with him! I am the landlady!"



"Amalia Ludwigovna, I beg you to recollect what you are saying,"

Katerina Ivanovna began haughtily (she always took a haughty tone with

the landlady that she might "remember her place" and even now could

not deny herself this satisfaction). "Amalia Ludwigovna . . ."



"I have you once before told that you to call me Amalia Ludwigovna may

not dare; I am Amalia Ivanovna."



"You are not Amalia Ivanovna, but Amalia Ludwigovna, and as I am not

one of your despicable flatterers like Mr. Lebeziatnikov, who's

laughing behind the door at this moment (a laugh and a cry of 'they

are at it again' was in fact audible at the door) so I shall always

call you Amalia Ludwigovna, though I fail to understand why you

dislike that name. You can see for yourself what has happened to

Semyon Zaharovitch; he is dying. I beg you to close that door at once

and to admit no one. Let him at least die in peace! Or I warn you the

Governor-General, himself, shall be informed of your conduct

to-morrow. The prince knew me as a girl; he remembers Semyon

Zaharovitch well and has often been a benefactor to him. Everyone

knows that Semyon Zaharovitch had many friends and protectors, whom he

abandoned himself from an honourable pride, knowing his unhappy

weakness, but now (she pointed to Raskolnikov) a generous young man

has come to our assistance, who has wealth and connections and whom

Semyon Zaharovitch has known from a child. You may rest assured,

Amalia Ludwigovna . . ."



All this was uttered with extreme rapidity, getting quicker and

quicker, but a cough suddenly cut short Katerina Ivanovna's eloquence.

At that instant the dying man recovered consciousness and uttered a

groan; she ran to him. The injured man opened his eyes and without

recognition or understanding gazed at Raskolnikov who was bending over

him. He drew deep, slow, painful breaths; blood oozed at the corners

of his mouth and drops of perspiration came out on his forehead. Not

recognising Raskolnikov, he began looking round uneasily. Katerina

Ivanovna looked at him with a sad but stern face, and tears trickled

from her eyes.



"My God! His whole chest is crushed! How he is bleeding," she said in

despair. "We must take off his clothes. Turn a little, Semyon

Zaharovitch, if you can," she cried to him.



Marmeladov recognised her.



"A priest," he articulated huskily.



Katerina Ivanovna walked to the window, laid her head against the

window frame and exclaimed in despair:



"Oh, cursed life!"



"A priest," the dying man said again after a moment's silence.



"They've gone for him," Katerina Ivanovna shouted to him, he obeyed

her shout and was silent. With sad and timid eyes he looked for her;

she returned and stood by his pillow. He seemed a little easier but

not for long.



Soon his eyes rested on little Lida, his favourite, who was shaking in

the corner, as though she were in a fit, and staring at him with her

wondering childish eyes.



"A-ah," he signed towards her uneasily. He wanted to say something.



"What now?" cried Katerina Ivanovna.



"Barefoot, barefoot!" he muttered, indicating with frenzied eyes the

child's bare feet.



"Be silent," Katerina Ivanovna cried irritably, "you know why she is

barefooted."



"Thank God, the doctor," exclaimed Raskolnikov, relieved.



The doctor came in, a precise little old man, a German, looking about

him mistrustfully; he went up to the sick man, took his pulse,

carefully felt his head and with the help of Katerina Ivanovna he

unbuttoned the blood-stained shirt, and bared the injured man's chest.

It was gashed, crushed and fractured, several ribs on the right side

were broken. On the left side, just over the heart, was a large,

sinister-looking yellowish-black bruise--a cruel kick from the horse's

hoof. The doctor frowned. The policeman told him that he was caught in

the wheel and turned round with it for thirty yards on the road.



"It's wonderful that he has recovered consciousness," the doctor

whispered softly to Raskolnikov.



"What do you think of him?" he asked.



"He will die immediately."



"Is there really no hope?"



"Not the faintest! He is at the last gasp. . . . His head is badly

injured, too . . . Hm . . . I could bleed him if you like, but . . .

it would be useless. He is bound to die within the next five or ten

minutes."



"Better bleed him then."



"If you like. . . . But I warn you it will be perfectly useless."



At that moment other steps were heard; the crowd in the passage

parted, and the priest, a little, grey old man, appeared in the

doorway bearing the sacrament. A policeman had gone for him at the

time of the accident. The doctor changed places with him, exchanging

glances with him. Raskolnikov begged the doctor to remain a little

while. He shrugged his shoulders and remained.



All stepped back. The confession was soon over. The dying man probably

understood little; he could only utter indistinct broken sounds.

Katerina Ivanovna took little Lida, lifted the boy from the chair,

knelt down in the corner by the stove and made the children kneel in

front of her. The little girl was still trembling; but the boy,

kneeling on his little bare knees, lifted his hand rhythmically,

crossing himself with precision and bowed down, touching the floor

with his forehead, which seemed to afford him especial satisfaction.

Katerina Ivanovna bit her lips and held back her tears; she prayed,

too, now and then pulling straight the boy's shirt, and managed to

cover the girl's bare shoulders with a kerchief, which she took from

the chest without rising from her knees or ceasing to pray. Meanwhile

the door from the inner rooms was opened inquisitively again. In the

passage the crowd of spectators from all the flats on the staircase

grew denser and denser, but they did not venture beyond the threshold.

A single candle-end lighted up the scene.



At that moment Polenka forced her way through the crowd at the door.

She came in panting from running so fast, took off her kerchief,

looked for her mother, went up to her and said, "She's coming, I met

her in the street." Her mother made her kneel beside her.



Timidly and noiselessly a young girl made her way through the crowd,

and strange was her appearance in that room, in the midst of want,

rags, death and despair. She, too, was in rags, her attire was all of

the cheapest, but decked out in gutter finery of a special stamp,

unmistakably betraying its shameful purpose. Sonia stopped short in

the doorway and looked about her bewildered, unconscious of

everything. She forgot her fourth-hand, gaudy silk dress, so unseemly

here with its ridiculous long train, and her immense crinoline that

filled up the whole doorway, and her light-coloured shoes, and the

parasol she brought with her, though it was no use at night, and the

absurd round straw hat with its flaring flame-coloured feather. Under

this rakishly-tilted hat was a pale, frightened little face with lips

parted and eyes staring in terror. Sonia was a small thin girl of

eighteen with fair hair, rather pretty, with wonderful blue eyes. She

looked intently at the bed and the priest; she too was out of breath

with running. At last whispers, some words in the crowd probably,

reached her. She looked down and took a step forward into the room,

still keeping close to the door.



The service was over. Katerina Ivanovna went up to her husband again.

The priest stepped back and turned to say a few words of admonition

and consolation to Katerina Ivanovna on leaving.



"What am I to do with these?" she interrupted sharply and irritably,

pointing to the little ones.



"God is merciful; look to the Most High for succour," the priest

began.



"Ach! He is merciful, but not to us."



"That's a sin, a sin, madam," observed the priest, shaking his head.



"And isn't that a sin?" cried Katerina Ivanovna, pointing to the dying

man.



"Perhaps those who have involuntarily caused the accident will agree

to compensate you, at least for the loss of his earnings."



"You don't understand!" cried Katerina Ivanovna angrily waving her

hand. "And why should they compensate me? Why, he was drunk and threw

himself under the horses! What earnings? He brought us in nothing but

misery. He drank everything away, the drunkard! He robbed us to get

drink, he wasted their lives and mine for drink! And thank God he's

dying! One less to keep!"



"You must forgive in the hour of death, that's a sin, madam, such

feelings are a great sin."



Katerina Ivanovna was busy with the dying man; she was giving him

water, wiping the blood and sweat from his head, setting his pillow

straight, and had only turned now and then for a moment to address the

priest. Now she flew at him almost in a frenzy.



"Ah, father! That's words and only words! Forgive! If he'd not been

run over, he'd have come home to-day drunk and his only shirt dirty

and in rags and he'd have fallen asleep like a log, and I should have

been sousing and rinsing till daybreak, washing his rags and the

children's and then drying them by the window and as soon as it was

daylight I should have been darning them. That's how I spend my

nights! . . . What's the use of talking of forgiveness! I have

forgiven as it is!"



A terrible hollow cough interrupted her words. She put her

handkerchief to her lips and showed it to the priest, pressing her

other hand to her aching chest. The handkerchief was covered with

blood. The priest bowed his head and said nothing.



Marmeladov was in the last agony; he did not take his eyes off the

face of Katerina Ivanovna, who was bending over him again. He kept

trying to say something to her; he began moving his tongue with

difficulty and articulating indistinctly, but Katerina Ivanovna,

understanding that he wanted to ask her forgiveness, called

peremptorily to him:



"Be silent! No need! I know what you want to say!" And the sick man

was silent, but at the same instant his wandering eyes strayed to the

doorway and he saw Sonia.



Till then he had not noticed her: she was standing in the shadow in a

corner.



"Who's that? Who's that?" he said suddenly in a thick gasping voice,

in agitation, turning his eyes in horror towards the door where his

daughter was standing, and trying to sit up.



"Lie down! Lie do-own!" cried Katerina Ivanovna.



With unnatural strength he had succeeded in propping himself on his

elbow. He looked wildly and fixedly for some time on his daughter, as

though not recognising her. He had never seen her before in such

attire. Suddenly he recognised her, crushed and ashamed in her

humiliation and gaudy finery, meekly awaiting her turn to say good-bye

to her dying father. His face showed intense suffering.



"Sonia! Daughter! Forgive!" he cried, and he tried to hold out his

hand to her, but losing his balance, he fell off the sofa, face

downwards on the floor. They rushed to pick him up, they put him on

the sofa; but he was dying. Sonia with a faint cry ran up, embraced

him and remained so without moving. He died in her arms.



"He's got what he wanted," Katerina Ivanovna cried, seeing her

husband's dead body. "Well, what's to be done now? How am I to bury

him! What can I give them to-morrow to eat?"



Raskolnikov went up to Katerina Ivanovna.



"Katerina Ivanovna," he began, "last week your husband told me all his

life and circumstances. . . . Believe me, he spoke of you with

passionate reverence. From that evening, when I learnt how devoted he

was to you all and how he loved and respected you especially, Katerina

Ivanovna, in spite of his unfortunate weakness, from that evening we

became friends. . . . Allow me now . . . to do something . . . to

repay my debt to my dead friend. Here are twenty roubles, I think--and

if that can be of any assistance to you, then . . . I . . . in short,

I will come again, I will be sure to come again . . . I shall,

perhaps, come again to-morrow. . . . Good-bye!"



And he went quickly out of the room, squeezing his way through the

crowd to the stairs. But in the crowd he suddenly jostled against

Nikodim Fomitch, who had heard of the accident and had come to give

instructions in person. They had not met since the scene at the police

station, but Nikodim Fomitch knew him instantly.



"Ah, is that you?" he asked him.



"He's dead," answered Raskolnikov. "The doctor and the priest have

been, all as it should have been. Don't worry the poor woman too much,

she is in consumption as it is. Try and cheer her up, if possible

. . . you are a kind-hearted man, I know . . ." he add Live and

learn . . ."



"Do you know what Zossimov whispered to me when we were coming out?"

Razumihin blurted out, as soon as they were in the street. "I won't

tell you everything, brother, because they are such fools. Zossimov

told me to talk freely to you on the way and get you to talk freely to

me, and afterwards I am to tell him about it, for he's got a notion in

his head that you are . . . mad or close on it. Only fancy! In the

first place, you've three times the brains he has; in the second, if

you are not mad, you needn't care a hang that he has got such a wild

idea; and thirdly, that piece of beef whose specialty is surgery has

gone mad on mental diseases, and what's brought him to this conclusion

about you was your conversation to-day with Zametov."



"Zametov told you all about it?"



"Yes, and he did well. Now I understand what it all means and so does

Zametov. . . . Well, the fact is, Rodya . . . the point is . . . I am

a little drunk now. . . . But that's . . . no matter . . . the point

is that this idea . . . you understand? was just being hatched in

their brains . . . you understand? That is, no one ventured to say it

aloud, because the idea is too absurd and especially since the arrest

of that painter, that bubble's burst and gone for ever. But why are

they such fools? I gave Zametov a bit of a thrashing at the time--

that's between ourselves, brother; please don't let out a hint that

you know of it; I've noticed he is a ticklish subject; it was at Luise

Ivanovna's. But to-day, to-day it's all cleared up. That Ilya

Petrovitch is at the bottom of it! He took advantage of your fainting

at the police station, but he is ashamed of it himself now; I know

that . . ."



Raskolnikov listened greedily. Razumihin was drunk enough to talk too

freely.



"I fainted then because it was so close and the smell of paint," said

Raskolnikov.



"No need to explain that! And it wasn't the paint only: the fever had

been coming on for a month; Zossimov testifies to that! But how

crushed that boy is now, you wouldn't believe! 'I am not worth his

little finger,' he says. Yours, he means. He has good feelings at

times, brother. But the lesson, the lesson you gave him to-day in the

Palais de Cristal, that was too good for anything! You frightened him

at first, you know, he nearly went into convulsions! You almost

convinced him again of the truth of all that hideous nonsense, and

then you suddenly--put out your tongue at him: 'There now, what do you

make of it?' It was perfect! He is crushed, annihilated now! It was

masterly, by Jove, it's what they deserve! Ah, that I wasn't there! He

was hoping to see you awfully. Porfiry, too, wants to make your

acquaintance . . ."



"Ah! . . . he too . . . but why did they put me down as mad?"



"Oh, not mad. I must have said too much, brother. . . . What struck

him, you see, was that only that subject seemed to interest you; now

it's clear why it did interest you; knowing all the circumstances

. . . and how that irritated you and worked in with your illness . . .

I am a little drunk, brother, only, confound him, he has some idea of

his own . . . I tell you, he's mad on mental diseases. But don't you

mind him . . ."



For half a minute both were silent.



"Listen, Razumihin," began Raskolnikov, "I want to tell you plainly:

I've just been at a death-bed, a clerk who died . . . I gave them all

my money . . . and besides I've just been kissed by someone who, if I

had killed anyone, would just the same . . . in fact I saw someone

else there . . . with a flame-coloured feather . . . but I am talking

nonsense; I am very weak, support me . . . we shall be at the stairs

directly . . ."



"What's the matter? What's the matter with you?" Razumihin asked

anxiously.



"I am a little giddy, but that's not the point, I am so sad, so sad

. . . like a woman. Look, what's that? Look, look!"



"What is it?"



"Don't you see? A light in my room, you see? Through the crack . . ."



They were already at the foot of the last flight of stairs, at the

level of the landlady's door, and they could, as a fact, see from

below that there was a light in Raskolnikov's garret.



"Queer! Nastasya, perhaps," observed Razumihin.



"She is never in my room at this time and she must be in bed long ago,

but . . . I don't care! Good-bye!"



"What do you mean? I am coming with you, we'll come in together!"



"I know we are going in together, but I want to shake hands here and

say good-bye to you here. So give me your hand, good-bye!"



"What's the matter with you, Rodya?"



"Nothing . . . come along . . . you shall be witness."



They began mounting the stairs, and the idea struck Razumihin that

perhaps Zossimov might be right after all. "Ah, I've upset him with my

chatter!" he muttered to himself.



When they reached the door they heard voices in the room.



"What is it?" cried Razumihin. Raskolnikov was the first to open the

door; he flung it wide and stood still in the doorway, dumbfoundered.



His mother and sister were sitting on his sofa and had been waiting an

hour and a half for him. Why had he never expected, never thought of

them, though the news that they had started, were on their way and

would arrive immediately, had been repeated to him only that day? They

had spent that hour and a half plying Nastasya with questions. She was

standing before them and had told them everything by now. They were

beside themselves with alarm when they heard of his "running away"

to-day, ill and, as they understood from her story, delirious! "Good

Heavens, what had become of him?" Both had been weeping, both had been

in anguish for that hour and a half.



A cry of joy, of ecstasy, greeted Raskolnikov's entrance. Both rushed

to him. But he stood like one dead; a sudden intolerable sensation

struck him like a thunderbolt. He did not lift his arms to embrace

them, he could not. His mother and sister clasped him in their arms,

kissed him, laughed and cried. He took a step, tottered and fell to

the ground, fainting.



Anxiety, cries of horror, moans . . . Razumihin who was standing in

the doorway flew into the room, seized the sick man in his strong arms

and in a moment had him on the sofa.



"It's nothing, nothing!" he cried to the mother and sister--"it's only

a faint, a mere trifle! Only just now the doctor said he was much

better, that he is perfectly well! Water! See, he is coming to

himself, he is all right again!"



And seizing Dounia by the arm so that he almost dislocated it, he made

her bend down to see that "he is all right again." The mother and

sister looked on him with emotion and gratitude, as their Providence.

They had heard already from Nastasya all that had been done for their

Rodya during his illness, by this "very competent young man," as

Pulcheria Alexandrovna Raskolnikov called him that evening in

conversation with Dounia.









PART III







CHAPTER I



Raskolnikov got up, and sat down on the sofa. He waved his hand weakly

to Razumihin to cut short the flow of warm and incoherent consolations

he was addressing to his mother and sister, took them both by the hand

and for a minute or two gazed from one to the other without speaking.

His mother was alarmed by his expression. It revealed an emotion

agonisingly poignant, and at the same time something immovable, almost

insane. Pulcheria Alexandrovna began to cry.



Avdotya Romanovna was pale; her hand trembled in her brother's.



"Go home . . . with him," he said in a broken voice, pointing to

Razumihin, "good-bye till to-morrow; to-morrow everything . . . Is it

long since you arrived?"



"This evening, Rodya," answered Pulcheria Alexandrovna, "the train was

awfully late. But, Rodya, nothing would induce me to leave you now! I

will spend the night here, near you . . ."



"Don't torture me!" he said with a gesture of irritation.



"I will stay with him," cried Razumihin, "I won't leave him for a

moment. Bother all my visitors! Let them rage to their hearts'

content! My uncle is presiding there."



"How, how can I thank you!" Pulcheria Alexandrovna was beginning, once

more pressing Razumihin's hands, but Raskolnikov interrupted her

again.



"I can't have it! I can't have it!" he repeated irritably, "don't

worry me! Enough, go away . . . I can't stand it!"



"Come, mamma, come out of the room at least for a minute," Dounia

whispered in dismay; "we are distressing him, that's evident."



"Mayn't I look at him after three years?" wept Pulcheria Alexandrovna.



"Stay," he stopped them again, "you keep interrupting me, and my ideas

get muddled. . . . Have you seen Luzhin?"



"No, Rodya, but he knows already of our arrival. We have heard, Rodya,

that Pyotr Petrovitch was so kind as to visit you today," Pulcheria

Alexandrovna added somewhat timidly.



"Yes . . . he was so kind . . . Dounia, I promised Luzhin I'd throw

him downstairs and told him to go to hell. . . ."



"Rodya, what are you saying! Surely, you don't mean to tell us . . ."

Pulcheria Alexandrovna began in alarm, but she stopped, looking at

Dounia.



Avdotya Romanovna was looking attentively at her brother, waiting for

what would come next. Both of them had heard of the quarrel from

Nastasya, so far as she had succeeded in understanding and reporting

it, and were in painful perplexity and suspense.



"Dounia," Raskolnikov continued with an effort, "I don't want that

marriage, so at the first opportunity to-morrow you must refuse

Luzhin, so that we may never hear his name again."



"Good Heavens!" cried Pulcheria Alexandrovna.



"Brother, think what you are saying!" Avdotya Romanovna began

impetuously, but immediately checked herself. "You are not fit to talk

now, perhaps; you are tired," she added gently.



"You think I am delirious? No . . . You are marrying Luzhin for /my/

sake. But I won't accept the sacrifice. And so write a letter before

to-morrow, to refuse him . . . Let me read it in the morning and that

will be the end of it!"



"That I can't do!" the girl cried, offended, "what right have

you . . ."



"Dounia, you are hasty, too, be quiet, to-morrow . . . Don't you see

. . ." the mother interposed in dismay. "Better come away!"



"He is raving," Razumihin cried tipsily, "or how would he dare!

To-morrow all this nonsense will be over . . . to-day he certainly did

drive him away. That was so. And Luzhin got angry, too. . . . He made

speeches here, wanted to show off his learning and he went out crest-

fallen. . . ."



"Then it's true?" cried Pulcheria Alexandrovna.



"Good-bye till to-morrow, brother," said Dounia compassionately--"let

us go, mother . . . Good-bye, Rodya."



"Do you hear, sister," he repeated after them, making a last effort,

"I am not delirious; this marriage is--an infamy. Let me act like a

scoundrel, but you mustn't . . . one is enough . . . and though I am a

scoundrel, I wouldn't own such a sister. It's me or Luzhin! Go

now. . . ."



"But you're out of your mind! Despot!" roared Razumihin; but

Raskolnikov did not and perhaps could not answer. He lay down on the

sofa, and turned to the wall, utterly exhausted. Avdotya Romanovna

looked with interest at Razumihin; her black eyes flashed; Razumihin

positively started at her glance.



Pulcheria Alexandrovna stood overwhelmed.



"Nothing would induce me to go," she whispered in despair to

Razumihin. "I will stay somewhere here . . . escort Dounia home."



"You'll spoil everything," Razumihin answered in the same whisper,

losing patience--"come out on to the stairs, anyway. Nastasya, show a

light! I assure you," he went on in a half whisper on the stairs-

"that he was almost beating the doctor and me this afternoon! Do you

understand? The doctor himself! Even he gave way and left him, so as

not to irritate him. I remained downstairs on guard, but he dressed at

once and slipped off. And he will slip off again if you irritate him,

at this time of night, and will do himself some mischief. . . ."



"What are you saying?"



"And Avdotya Romanovna can't possibly be left in those lodgings

without you. Just think where you are staying! That blackguard Pyotr

Petrovitch couldn't find you better lodgings . . . But you know I've

had a little to drink, and that's what makes me . . . swear; don't

mind it. . . ."



"But I'll go to the landlady here," Pulcheria Alexandrovna insisted,

"Ill beseech her to find some corner for Dounia and me for the night.

I can't leave him like that, I cannot!"



This conversation took place on the landing just before the landlady's

door. Nastasya lighted them from a step below. Razumihin was in

extraordinary excitement. Half an hour earlier, while he was bringing

Raskolnikov home, he had indeed talked too freely, but he was aware of

it himself, and his head was clear in spite of the vast quantities he

had imbibed. Now he was in a state bordering on ecstasy, and all that

he had drunk seemed to fly to his head with redoubled effect. He stood

with the two ladies, seizing both by their hands, persuading them, and

giving them reasons with astonishing plainness of speech, and at

almost every word he uttered, probably to emphasise his arguments, he

squeezed their hands painfully as in a vise. He stared at Avdotya

Romanovna without the least regard for good manners. They sometimes

pulled their hands out of his huge bony paws, but far from noticing

what was the matter, he drew them all the closer to him. If they'd

told him to jump head foremost from the staircase, he would have done

it without thought or hesitation in their service. Though Pulcheria

Alexandrovna felt that the young man was really too eccentric and

pinched her hand too much, in her anxiety over her Rodya she looked on

his presence as providential, and was unwilling to notice all his

peculiarities. But though Avdotya Romanovna shared her anxiety, and

was not of timorous disposition, she could not see the glowing light

in his eyes without wonder and almost alarm. It was only the unbounded

confidence inspired by Nastasya's account of her brother's queer

friend, which prevented her from trying to run away from him, and to

persuade her mother to do the same. She realised, too, that even

running away was perhaps impossible now. Ten minutes later, however,

she was considerably reassured; it was characteristic of Razumihin

that he showed his true nature at once, whatever mood he might be in,

so that people quickly saw the sort of man they had to deal with.



"You can't go to the landlady, that's perfect nonsense!" he cried. "If

you stay, though you are his mother, you'll drive him to a frenzy, and

then goodness knows what will happen! Listen, I'll tell you what I'll

do: Nastasya will stay with him now, and I'll conduct you both home,

you can't be in the streets alone; Petersburg is an awful place in

that way. . . . But no matter! Then I'll run straight back here and a

quarter of an hour later, on my word of honour, I'll bring you news

how he is, whether he is asleep, and all that. Then, listen! Then I'll

run home in a twinkling--I've a lot of friends there, all drunk--I'll

fetch Zossimov--that's the doctor who is looking after him, he is

there, too, but he is not drunk; he is not drunk, he is never drunk!

I'll drag him to Rodya, and then to you, so that you'll get two

reports in the hour--from the doctor, you understand, from the doctor

himself, that's a very different thing from my account of him! If

there's anything wrong, I swear I'll bring you here myself, but, if

it's all right, you go to bed. And I'll spend the night here, in the

passage, he won't hear me, and I'll tell Zossimov to sleep at the

landlady's, to be at hand. Which is better for him: you or the doctor?

So come home then! But the landlady is out of the question; it's all

right for me, but it's out of the question for you: she wouldn't take

you, for she's . . . for she's a fool . . . She'd be jealous on my

account of Avdotya Romanovna and of you, too, if you want to know

. . . of Avdotya Romanovna certainly. She is an absolutely, absolutely

unaccountable character! But I am a fool, too! . . . No matter! Come

along! Do you trust me? Come, do you trust me or not?"



"Let us go, mother," said Avdotya Romanovna,  will think better of it to-morrow," she

added, probing her further.



"And I am sure that he will say the same to-morrow . . . about that,"

Avdotya Romanovna said finally. And, of course, there was no going

beyond that, for this was a point which Pulcheria Alexandrovna was

afraid to discuss. Dounia went up and kissed her mother. The latter

warmly embraced her without speaking. Then she sat down to wait

anxiously for Razumihin's return, timidly watching her daughter who

walked up and down the room with her arms folded, lost in thought.

This walking up and down when she was thinking was a habit of Avdotya

Romanovna's and the mother was always afraid to break in on her

daughter's mood at such moments.



Razumihin, of course, was ridiculous in his sudden drunken infatuation

for Avdotya Romanovna. Yet apart from his eccentric condition, many

people would have thought it justified if they had seen Avdotya

Romanovna, especially at that moment when she was walking to and fro

with folded arms, pensive and melancholy. Avdotya Romanovna was

remarkably good looking; she was tall, strikingly well-proportioned,

strong and self-reliant--the latter quality was apparent in every

gesture, though it did not in the least detract from the grace and

softness of her movements. In face she resembled her brother, but she

might be described as really beautiful. Her hair was dark brown, a

little lighter than her brother's; there was a proud light in her

almost black eyes and yet at times a look of extraordinary kindness.

She was pale, but it was a healthy pallor; her face was radiant with

freshness and vigour. Her mouth was rather small; the full red lower

lip projected a little as did her chin; it was the only irregularity

in her beautiful face, but it gave it a peculiarly individual and

almost haughty expression. Her face was always more serious and

thoughtful than gay; but how well smiles, how well youthful,

lighthearted, irresponsible, laughter suited her face! It was natural

enough that a warm, open, simple-hearted, honest giant like Razumihin,

who had never seen anyone like her and was not quite sober at the

time, should lose his head immediately. Besides, as chance would have

it, he saw Dounia for the first time transfigured by her love for her

brother and her joy at meeting him. Afterwards he saw her lower lip

quiver with indignation at her brother's insolent, cruel and

ungrateful words--and his fate was sealed.



He had spoken the truth, moreover, when he blurted out in his drunken

talk on the stairs that Praskovya Pavlovna, Raskolnikov's eccentric

landlady, would be jealous of Pulcheria Alexandrovna as well as of

Avdotya Romanovna on his account. Although Pulcheria Alexandrovna was

forty-three, her face still retained traces of her former beauty; she

looked much younger than her age, indeed, which is almost always the

case with women who retain serenity of spirit, sensitiveness and pure

sincere warmth of heart to old age. We may add in parenthesis that to

preserve all this is the only means of retaining beauty to old age.

Her hair had begun to grow grey and thin, there had long been little

crow's foot wrinkles round her eyes, her cheeks were hollow and sunken

from anxiety and grief, and yet it was a handsome face. She was Dounia

over again, twenty years older, but without the projecting underlip.

Pulcheria Alexandrovna was emotional, but not sentimental, timid and

yielding, but only to a certain point. She could give way and accept a

great deal even of what was contrary to her convictions, but there was

a certain barrier fixed by honesty, principle and the deepest

convictions which nothing would induce her to cross.



Exactly twenty minutes after Razumihin's departure, there came two

subdued but hurried knocks at the door: he had come back.



"I won't come in, I haven't time," he hastened to say when the door

was opened. "He sleeps like a top, soundly, quietly, and God grant he

may sleep ten hours. Nastasya's with him; I told her not to leave till

I came. Now I am fetching Zossimov, he will report to you and then

you'd better turn in; I can see you are too tired to do

anything. . . ."



And he ran off down the corridor.



"What a very competent and . . . devoted young man!" cried Pulcheria

Alexandrovna exceedingly delighted.



"He seems a splendid person!" Avdotya Romanovna replied with some

warmth, resuming her walk up and down the room.



It was nearly an hour later when they heard footsteps in the corridor

and another knock at the door. Both women waited this time completely

relying on Razumihin's promise; he actually had succeeded in bringing

Zossimov. Zossimov had agreed at once to desert the drinking party to

go to Raskolnikov's, but he came reluctantly and with the greatest

suspicion to see the ladies, mistrusting Razumihin in his exhilarated

condition. But his vanity was at once reassured and flattered; he saw

that they were really expecting him as an oracle. He stayed just ten

minutes and succeeded in completely convincing and comforting

Pulcheria Alexandrovna. He spoke with marked sympathy, but with the

reserve and extreme seriousness of a young doctor at an important

consultation. He did not utter a word on any other subject and did not

display the slightest desire to enter into more personal relations

with the two ladies. Remarking at his first entrance the dazzling

beauty of Avdotya Romanovna, he endeavoured not to notice her at all

during his visit and addressed himself solely to Pulcheria

Alexandrovna. All this gave him extraordinary inward satisfaction. He

declared that he thought the invalid at this moment going on very

satisfactorily. According to his observations the patient's illness

was due partly to his unfortunate material surroundings during the

last few months, but it had partly also a moral origin, "was, so to

speak, the product of several material and moral influences,

anxieties, apprehensions, troubles, certain ideas . . . and so on."

Noticing stealthily that Avdotya Romanovna was following his words

with close attention, Zossimov allowed himself to enlarge on this

theme. On Pulcheria Alexandrovna's anxiously and timidly inquiring as

to "some suspicion of insanity," he replied with a composed and candid

smile that his words had been exaggerated; that certainly the patient

had some fixed idea, something approaching a monomania--he, Zossimov,

was now particularly studying this interesting branch of medicine--but

that it must be recollected that until to-day the patient had been in

delirium and . . . and that no doubt the presence of his family would

have a favourable effect on his recovery and distract his mind, "if

only all fresh shocks can be avoided," he added significantly. Then he

got up, took leave with an impressive and affable bow, while

blessings, warm gratitude, and entreaties were showered upon him, and

Avdotya Romanovna spontaneously offered her hand to him. He went out

exceedingly pleased with his visit and still more so with himself.



"We'll talk to-morrow; go to bed at once!" Razumihin said in

conclusion, following Zossimov out. "I'll be with you to-morrow

morning as early as possible with my report."



"That's a fetching little girl, Avdotya Romanovna," remarked Zossimov,

almost licking his lips as they both came out into the street.



"Fetching? You said fetching?" roared Razumihin and he flew at

Zossimov and seized him by the throat. "If you ever dare. . . . Do you

understand? Do you understand?" he shouted, shaking him by the collar

and squeezing him against the wall. "Do you hear?"



"Let me go, you drunken devil," said Zossimov, struggling and when he

had let him go, he stared at him and went off into a sudden guffaw.

Razumihin stood facing him in gloomy and earnest reflection.



"Of course, I am an ass," he observed, sombre as a storm cloud, "but

still . . . you are another."



"No, brother, not at all such another. I am not dreaming of any

folly."



They walked along in silence and only when they were close to

Raskolnikov's lodgings, Razumihin broke the silence in considerable

anxt! So be it! Well, he'd make a point then of being dirty,

greasy, pothouse in his manners and he wouldn't care! He'd be worse!"



He was engaged in such monologues when Zossimov, who had spent the

night in Praskovya Pavlovna's parlour, came in.



He was going home and was in a hurry to look at the invalid first.

Razumihin informed him that Raskolnikov was sleeping like a dormouse.

Zossimov gave orders that they shouldn't wake him and promised to see

him again about eleven.



"If he is still at home," he added. "Damn it all! If one can't control

one's patients, how is one to cure them? Do you know whether /he/ will

go to them, or whether /they/ are coming here?"



"They are coming, I think," said Razumihin, understanding the object

of the question, "and they will discuss their family affairs, no

doubt. I'll be off. You, as the doctor, have more right to be here

than I."



"But I am not a father confessor; I shall come and go away; I've

plenty to do besides looking after them."



"One thing worries me," interposed Razumihin, frowning. "On the way

home I talked a lot of drunken nonsense to him . . . all sorts of

things . . . and amongst them that you were afraid that he . . . might

become insane."



"You told the ladies so, too."



"I know it was stupid! You may beat me if you like! Did you think so

seriously?"



"That's nonsense, I tell you, how could I think it seriously? You,

yourself, described him as a monomaniac when you fetched me to him

. . . and we added fuel to the fire yesterday, you did, that is, with

your story about the painter; it was a nice conversation, when he was,

perhaps, mad on that very point! If only I'd known what happened then

at the police station and that some wretch . . . had insulted him with

this suspicion! Hm . . . I would not have allowed that conversation

yesterday. These monomaniacs will make a mountain out of a mole-hill

. . . and see their fancies as solid realities. . . . As far as I

remember, it was Zametov's story that cleared up half the mystery, to

my mind. Why, I know one case in which a hypochondriac, a man of

forty, cut the throat of a little boy of eight, because he couldn't

endure the jokes he made every day at table! And in this case his

rags, the insolent police officer, the fever and this suspicion! All

that working upon a man half frantic with hypochondria, and with his

morbid exceptional vanity! That may well have been the starting-point

of illness. Well, bother it all! . . . And, by the way, that Zametov

certainly is a nice fellow, but hm . . . he shouldn't have told all

that last night. He is an awful chatterbox!"



"But whom did he tell it to? You and me?"



"And Porfiry."



"What does that matter?"



"And, by the way, have you any influence on them, his mother and

sister? Tell them to be more careful with him to-day. . . ."



"They'll get on all right!" Razumihin answered reluctantly.



"Why is he so set against this Luzhin? A man with money and she

doesn't seem to dislike him . . . and they haven't a farthing, I

suppose? eh?"



"But what business is it of yours?" Razumihin cried with annoyance.

"How can I tell whether they've a farthing? Ask them yourself and

perhaps you'll find out. . . ."



"Foo! what an ass you are sometimes! Last night's wine has not gone

off yet. . . . Good-bye; thank your Praskovya Pavlovna from me for my

night's lodging. She locked herself in, made no reply to my /bonjour/

through the door; she was up at seven o'clock, the samovar was taken

into her from the kitchen. I was not vouchsafed a personal

interview. . . ."



At nine o'clock precisely Razumihin reached the lodgings at

Bakaleyev's house. Both ladies were waiting for him with nervous

impatience. They had risen at seven o'clock or earlier. He entered

looking as black as night, bowed awkwardly and was at once furious

with himself for it. He had reckoned without his host: Pulcheria

Alexandrovna fairly rushed at him, seized him by both hands and was

almost kissing them. He glanced timidly at Avdotya Romanovna, but her

proud countenance wore at that moment an expression of such gratitude

and friendliness, such complete and unlooked-for respect (in place of

the sneering looks and ill-disguised contempt he had expected), that

it threw him into greater confusion than if he had been met with

abuse. Fortunately there was a subject for conversation, and he made

haste to snatch at it.



Hearing that everything was going well and that Rodya had not yet

waked, Pulcheria Alexandrovna declared that she was glad to hear it,

because "she had something which it was very, very necessary to talk

over beforehand." Then followed an inquiry about breakfast and an

invitation to have it with them; they had waited to have it with him.

Avdotya Romanovna rang the bell: it was answered by a ragged dirty

waiter, and they asked him to bring tea which was served at last, but

in such a dirty and disorderly way that the ladies were ashamed.

Razumihin vigorously attacked the lodgings, but, remembering Luzhin,

stopped in embarrassment and was greatly relieved by Pulcheria

Alexandrovna's questions, which showered in a continual stream upon

him.



He talked for three quarters of an hour, being constantly interrupted

by their questions, and succeeded in describing to them all the most

important facts he knew of the last year of Raskolnikov's life,

concluding with a circumstantial account of his illness. He omitted,

however, many things, which were better omitted, including the scene

at the police station with all its consequences. They listened eagerly

to his story, and, when he thought he had finished and satisfied his

listeners, he found that they considered he had hardly begun.



"Tell me, tell me! What do you think . . . ? Excuse me, I still don't

know your name!" Pulcheria Alexandrovna put in hastily.



"Dmitri Prokofitch."



"I should like very, very much to know, Dmitri Prokofitch . . . how he

looks . . . on things in general now, that is, how can I explain, what

are his likes and dislikes? Is he always so irritable? Tell me, if you

can, what are his hopes and, so to say, his dreams? Under what

influences is he now? In a word, I should like . . ."



"Ah, mother, how can he answer all that at once?" observed Dounia.



"Good heavens, I had not expected to find him in the least like this,

Dmitri Prokofitch!"



"Naturally," answered Razumihin. "I have no mother, but my uncle comes

every year and almost every time he can scarcely recognise me, even in

appearance, though he is a clever man; and your three years'

separation means a great deal. What am I to tell you? I have known

Rodion for a year and a half; he is morose, gloomy, proud and haughty,

and of late--and perhaps for a long time before--he has been

suspicious and fanciful. He has a noble nature and a kind heart. He

does not like showing his feelings and would rather do a cruel thing

than open his heart freely. Sometimes, though, he is not at all

morbid, but simply cold and inhumanly callous; it's as though he were

alternating between two characters. Sometimes he is fearfully

reserved! He says he is so busy that everything is a hindrance, and

yet he lies in bed doing nothing. He doesn't jeer at things, not

because he hasn't the wit, but as though he hadn't time to waste on

such trifles. He never listens to what is said to him. He is never

interested in what interests other people at any given moment. He

thinks very highly of himself and perhaps he is right. Well, what

more? I think your arrival will have a most beneficial influence upon

him."



"God grant it may," cried Pulcheria Alexandrovna, distressed by

Razumihin's account of her Rodya.



And Razumihin ventured to look more boldly at Avdotya Romanovna at

last. He glanced at her often while he was talking, but only for a

moment and looked away again at once. Avdotya Romanovna sat at the

table, listening attentively, then got up again and began walking to

and fro with her arms folded and her lips compressed, occasionally

putting in a question, without stopping her walk. She had the same

habit of not listening to what was said. She was wearing a dress of

thin dark stuff and she had a white transparent scarf round her neck.

Razumihin soon detected signs of extreme poverty in their belongings.

Had Avdotya Romanovna been dressed like a queen, he felt that he would

not be afraid of her, but perhaps just because she was poorly dressed

and that he noticed all the misery of her surroundings, his heart was

filled with dread and he began to be afraid of every word he uttered,

every gesture he made, which was very trying for a man who already

felt diffident.



"You've told us a great deal that is interesting about my brother's

character . . . and have told it impartially. I am glad. I thought

that you were too uncritically devoted to him," observed Avdotya

Romanovna with a smile. "I think you are right that he needs a woman's

care," she added thoughtfully.



"I didn't say so; but I daresay you are right, only . . ."



"What?"



"He loves no one and perhaps he never will," Razumihin declared

decisively.



"You mean he is not capable of love?"



"Do you know, Avdotya Romanovna, you are awfully like your brother, in

everything, indeed!" he blurted out suddenly to his own surprise, but

remembering at once what he had just before said of her brother, he

turned as red as a crab and was overcome with confusion. Avdotya

Romanovna couldn't help laughing when she looked at him.



"You may both be mistaken about Rodya," Pulcheria Alexandrovna

remarked, slightly piqued. "I am not talking of our present

difficulty, Dounia. What Pyotr Petrovitch writes in this letter and

what you and I have supposed may be mistaken, but you can't imagine,

Dmitri Prokofitch, how moody and, so to say, capricious he is. I never

could depend on what he would do when he was only fifteen. And I am

sure that he might do something now that nobody else would think of

doing . . . Well, for instance, do you know how a year and a half ago

he astounded me and gave me a shock that nearly killed me, when he had

the idea of marrying that girl--what was her name--his landlady's

daughter?"



"Did you hear about that affair?" asked Avdotya Romanovna.



"Do you suppose----" Pulcheria Alexandrovna continued warmly. "Do you

suppose that my tears, my entreaties, my illness, my possible death

from grief, our poverty would have made him pause? No, he would calmly

have disregarded all obstacles. And yet it isn't that he doesn't love

us!"



"He has never spoken a word of that affair to me," Razumihin answered

cautiously. "But I did hear something from Praskovya Pavlovna herself,

though she is by no means a gossip. And what I heard certainly was

rather strange."



"And what did you hear?" both the ladies asked at once.



"Well, nothing very special. I only learned that the marriage, which

only failed to take place through the girl's death, was not at all to

Praskovya Pavlovna's liking. They say, too, the girl was not at all

pretty, in fact I am told positively ugly . . . and such an invalid

. . . and queer. But she seems to have had some good qualities. She

must have had some good qualities or it's quite inexplicable. . . .

She had no money either and he wouldn't have considered her money.

. . . But it's always difficult to judge in such matters."



"I am sure she was a good girl," Avdotya Romanovna observed briefly.



"God forgive me, I simply rejoiced at her death. Though I don't know

which of them would have caused most misery to the other--he to her or

she to him," Pulcheria Alexandrovna concluded. Then she began

tentatively questioning him about the scene on the previous day with

Luzhin, hesitating and continually glancing at Dounia, obviously to

the latter's annoyance. This incident more than all the rest evidently

caused her uneasiness, even consternation. Razumihin described it in

detail again, but this time he added his own conclusions: he openly

blamed Raskolnikov for intentionally insulting Pyotr Petrovitch, not

seeking to excuse him on the score of his illness.



"He had planned it before his illness," he added.



"I think so, too," Pulcheria Alexandrovna agreed with a dejected air.

But she was very much surprised at hearing Razumihin express himself

so carefully and even with a certain respect about Pyotr Petrovitch.

Avdotya Romanovna, too, was struck by it.



"So this is your opinion of Pyotr Petrovitch?" Pulcheria Alexandrovna

could not resist asking.



"I can have no other opinion of your daughter's future husband,"

Razumihin answered firmly and with warmth, "and I don't say it simply

from vulgar politeness, but because . . . simply because Avdotya

Romanovna has of her own free will deigned to accept this man. If I

spoke so rudely of him last night, it was because I was disgustingly

drunk and . . . mad besides; yes, mad, crazy, I lost my head

completely . . . and this morning I am ashamed of it."



He crimsoned and ceased speaking. Avdotya Romanovna flushed, but did

not break the silence. She had not uttered a word from the moment they

began to speak of Luzhin.



Without her support Pulcheria Alexandrovna obviously did not know what

to do. At last, faltering and continually glancing at her daughter,

she confessed that she was exceedingly worried by one circumstance.



"You see, Dmitri Prokofitch," she began. "I'll be perfectly open with

Dmitri Prokofitch, Dounia?"



"Of course, mother," said Avdotya Romanovna emphatically.



"This is what it is," she began in haste, as though the permission to

speak of her trouble lifted a weight off her mind. "Very early this

morning we got a note from Pyotr Petrovitch in reply to our letter

announcing our arrival. He promised to meet us at the station, you

know; instead of that he sent a servant to bring us the address of

these lodgings and to show us the way; and he sent a message that he

would be here himself this morning. But this morning this note came

from him. You'd better read it yourself; there is one point in it

which worries me very much . . . you will soon see what that is, and

. . . tell me your candid opinion, Dmitri Prokofitch! You know Rodya's

character better than anyone and no one can advise us better than you

can. Dounia, I must tell you, made her decision at once, but I still

don't feel sure how to act and I . . . I've been waiting for your

opinion."



Razumihin opened the note which was dated the previous evening and

read as follows:



 "Dear Madam, Pulcheria Alexandrovna, I have the honour to inform

  you that owing to unforeseen obstacles I was rendered unable to

  meet you at the railway station; I sent a very competent person

  with the same object in view. I likewise shall be deprived of the

  honour of an interview with you to-morrow morning by business in

  the Senate that does not admit of delay, and also that I may not

  intrude on your family circle while you are meeting your son, and

  Avdotya Romanovna her brother. I shall have the honour of visiting

  you and paying you my respects at your lodgings not later than

  to-morrow evening at eight o'clock precisely, and herewith I

  venture to present my earnest and, I may add, imperative request

  that Rodion Romanovitch may not be present at our interview--as he

  offered me a gross and unprecedented affront on the occasion of my

  visit to him in his illness yesterday, and, moreover, since I

  desire from you personally an indispensable and circumstantial

  explanation upon a certain point, in regard to which I wish to

  learn your own interpretation. I have the honour to inform you, in

  anticipation, that if, in spite of my request, I meet Rodion

  Romanovitch, I shall be compelled to withdraw immediately and then

  you have only yourself to blame. I write on the assumption that

  Rodion Romanovitch who appeared so ill at my visit, suddenly

  recovered two hours later and so, being able to leave the house,

  may visit you also. I was confirmed in that belief by the

  testimony of my own eyes in the lodging of a drunken man who was

  run over and has since died, to whose daughter, a young woman of

  notorious behaviour, he gave twenty-five roublkolnikov coldly.



"I should say, too," continued Zossimov with zest, "that your complete

recovery depends solely on yourself. Now that one can talk to you, I

should like to impress upon you that it is essential to avoid the

elementary, so to speak, fundamental causes tending to produce your

morbid condition: in that case you will be cured, if not, it will go

from bad to worse. These fundamental causes I don't know, but they

must be known to you. You are an intelligent man, and must have

observed yourself, of course. I fancy the first stage of your

derangement coincides with your leaving the university. You must not

be left without occupation, and so, work and a definite aim set before

you might, I fancy, be very beneficial."



"Yes, yes; you are perfectly right. . . . I will make haste and return

to the university: and then everything will go smoothly. . . ."



Zossimov, who had begun his sage advice partly to make an effect

before the ladies, was certainly somewhat mystified, when, glancing at

his patient, he observed unmistakable mockery on his face. This lasted

an instant, however. Pulcheria Alexandrovna began at once thanking

Zossimov, especially for his visit to their lodging the previous

night.



"What! he saw you last night?" Raskolnikov asked, as though startled.

"Then you have not slept either after your journey."



"Ach, Rodya, that was only till two o'clock. Dounia and I never go to

bed before two at home."



"I don't know how to thank him either," Raskolnikov went on, suddenly

frowning and looking down. "Setting aside the question of payment--

forgive me for referring to it (he turned to Zossimov)--I really don't

know what I have done to deserve such special attention from you! I

simply don't understand it . . . and . . . and . . . it weighs upon

me, indeed, because I don't understand it. I tell you so candidly."



"Don't be irritated." Zossimov forced himself to laugh. "Assume that

you are my first patient--well--we fellows just beginning to practise

love our first patients as if they were our children, and some almost

fall in love with them. And, of course, I am not rich in patients."



"I say nothing about him," added Raskolnikov, pointing to Razumihin,

"though he has had nothing from me either but insult and trouble."



"What nonsense he is talking! Why, you are in a sentimental mood

to-day, are you?" shouted Razumihin.



If he had had more penetration he would have seen that there was no

trace of sentimentality in him, but something indeed quite the

opposite. But Avdotya Romanovna noticed it. She was intently and

uneasily watching her brother.



"As for you, mother, I don't dare to speak," he went on, as though

repeating a lesson learned by heart. "It is only to-day that I have

been able to realise a little how distressed you must have been here

yesterday, waiting for me to come back."



When he had said this, he suddenly held out his hand to his sister,

smiling without a word. But in this smile there was a flash of real

unfeigned feeling. Dounia caught it at once, and warmly pressed his

hand, overjoyed and thankful. It was the first time he had addressed

her since their dispute the previous day. The mother's face lighted up

with ecstatic happiness at the sight of this conclusive unspoken

reconciliation. "Yes, that is what I love him for," Razumihin,

exaggerating it all, muttered to himself, with a vigorous turn in his

chair. "He has these movements."



"And how well he does it all," the mother was thinking to herself.

"What generous impulses he has, and how simply, how delicately he put

an end to all the misunderstanding with his sister--simply by holding

out his hand at the right minute and looking at her like that. . . .

And what fine eyes he has, and how fine his whole face is! . . . He is

even better looking than Dounia. . . . But, good heavens, what a suit

--how terribly he's dressed! . . . Vasya, the messenger boy in Afanasy

Ivanitch's shop, is better dressed! I could rush at him and hug him

. . . weep over him--but I am afraid. . . . Oh, dear, he's so strange!

He's talking kindly, but I'm afraid! Why, what am I afraid of? . . ."



"Oh, Rodya, you wouldn't believe," she began suddenly, in haste to

answer his words to her, "how unhappy Dounia and I were yesterday! Now

that it's all over and done with and we are quite happy again--I can

tell you. Fancy, we ran here almost straight from the train to embrace

you and that woman--ah, here she is! Good morning, Nastasya! . . . She

told us at once that you were lying in a high fever and had just run

away from the doctor in delirium, and they were looking for you in the

streets. You can't imagine how we felt! I couldn't help thinking of

the tragic end of Lieutenant Potanchikov, a friend of your father's--

you can't remember him, Rodya--who ran out in the same way in a high

fever and fell into the well in the court-yard and they couldn't pull

him out till next day. Of course, we exaggerated things. We were on

the point of rushing to find Pyotr Petrovitch to ask him to help.

. . . Because we were alone, utterly alone," she said plaintively and

stopped short, suddenly, recollecting it was still somewhat dangerous

to speak of Pyotr Petrovitch, although "we are quite happy again."



"Yes, yes. . . . Of course it's very annoying. . . ." Raskolnikov

muttered in reply, but with such a preoccupied and inattentive air

that Dounia gazed at him in perplexity.



"What else was it I wanted to say?" He went on trying to recollect.

"Oh, yes; mother, and you too, Dounia, please don't think that I

didn't mean to come and see you to-day and was waiting for you to come

first."



"What are you saying, Rodya?" cried Pulcheria Alexandrovna. She, too,

was surprised.



"Is he answering us as a duty?" Dounia wondered. "Is he being

reconciled and asking forgiveness as though he were performing a rite

or repeating a lesson?"



"I've only just waked up, and wanted to go to you, but was delayed

owing to my clothes; I forgot yesterday to ask her . . . Nastasya

. . . to wash out the blood . . . I've only just dressed."



"Blood! What blood?" Pulcheria Alexandrovna asked in alarm.



"Oh, nothing--don't be uneasy. It was when I was wandering about

yesterday, rather delirious, I chanced upon a man who had been run

over . . . a clerk . . ."



"Delirious? But you remember everything!" Razumihin interrupted.



"That's true," Raskolnikov answered with special carefulness. "I

remember everything even to the slightest detail, and yet--why I did

that and went there and said that, I can't clearly explain now."



"A familiar phenomenon," interposed Zossimov, "actions are sometimes

performed in a masterly and most cunning way, while the direction of

the actions is deranged and dependent on various morbid impressions--

it's like a dream."



"Perhaps it's a good thing really that he should think me almost a

madman," thought Raskolnikov.



"Why, people in perfect health act in the same way too," observed

Dounia, looking uneasily at Zossimov.



"There is some truth in your observation," the latter replied. "In

that sense we are certainly all not infrequently like madmen, but with

the slight difference that the deranged are somewhat madder, for we

must draw a line. A normal man, it is true, hardly exists. Among

dozens--perhaps hundreds of thousands--hardly one is to be met with."



At the word "madman," carelessly dropped by Zossimov in his chatter on

his favourite subject, everyone frowned.



Raskolnikov sat seeming not to pay attention, plunged in thought with

a strange smile on his pale lips. He was still meditating on

something.



"Well, what about the man who was run over? I interrupted you!"

Razumihin cried hastily.



"What?" Raskolnikov seemed to wake up. "Oh . . . I got spattered with

blood helping to carry him to his lodging. By the way, mamma, I did an

unpardonable thing yesterday. I was literally out of my mind. I gave

away all the money you sent me . . . to his wife for the funeral.

She's a widow now, in consumption, a poor creature . . . three little

children, starving . . . nothire will be enough left . . . and Katerina Ivanovna

was very anxious it should be so. You know one can't . . . it's a

comfort to her . . . she is like that, you know. . . ."



"I understand, I understand . . . of course . . . why do you look at

my room like that? My mother has just said it is like a tomb."



"You gave us everything yesterday," Sonia said suddenly, in reply, in

a loud rapid whisper; and again she looked down in confusion. Her lips

and chin were trembling once more. She had been struck at once by

Raskolnikov's poor surroundings, and now these words broke out

spontaneously. A silence followed. There was a light in Dounia's eyes,

and even Pulcheria Alexandrovna looked kindly at Sonia.



"Rodya," she said, getting up, "we shall have dinner together, of

course. Come, Dounia. . . . And you, Rodya, had better go for a little

walk, and then rest and lie down before you come to see us. . . . I am

afraid we have exhausted you. . . ."



"Yes, yes, I'll come," he answered, getting up fussily. "But I have

something to see to."



"But surely you will have dinner together?" cried Razumihin, looking

in surprise at Raskolnikov. "What do you mean?"



"Yes, yes, I am coming . . . of course, of course! And you stay a

minute. You do not want him just now, do you, mother? Or perhaps I am

taking him from you?"



"Oh, no, no. And will you, Dmitri Prokofitch, do us the favour of

dining with us?"



"Please do," added Dounia.



Razumihin bowed, positively radiant. For one moment, they were all

strangely embarrassed.



"Good-bye, Rodya, that is till we meet. I do not like saying good-bye.

Good-bye, Nastasya. Ah, I have said good-bye again."



Pulcheria Alexandrovna meant to greet Sonia, too; but it somehow

failed to come off, and she went in a flutter out of the room.



But Avdotya Romanovna seemed to await her turn, and following her

mother out, gave Sonia an attentive, courteous bow. Sonia, in

confusion, gave a hurried, frightened curtsy. There was a look of

poignant discomfort in her face, as though Avdotya Romanovna's

courtesy and attention were oppressive and painful to her.



"Dounia, good-bye," called Raskolnikov, in the passage. "Give me your

hand."



"Why, I did give it to you. Have you forgotten?" said Dounia, turning

warmly and awkwardly to him.



"Never mind, give it to me again." And he squeezed her fingers warmly.



Dounia smiled, flushed, pulled her hand away, and went off quite

happy.



"Come, that's capital," he said to Sonia, going back and looking

brightly at her. "God give peace to the dead, the living have still to

live. That is right, isn't it?"



Sonia looked surprised at the sudden brightness of his face. He looked

at her for some moments in silence. The whole history of the dead

father floated before his memory in those moments. . . .



*****



"Heavens, Dounia," Pulcheria Alexandrovna began, as soon as they were

in the street, "I really feel relieved myself at coming away--more at

ease. How little did I think yesterday in the train that I could ever

be glad of that."



"I tell you again, mother, he is still very ill. Don't you see it?

Perhaps worrying about us upset him. We must be patient, and much,

much can be forgiven."



"Well, you were not very patient!" Pulcheria Alexandrovna caught her

up, hotly and jealously. "Do you know, Dounia, I was looking at you

two. You are the very portrait of him, and not so much in face as in

soul. You are both melancholy, both morose and hot-tempered, both

haughty and both generous. . . . Surely he can't be an egoist, Dounia.

Eh? When I think of what is in store for us this evening, my heart

sinks!"



"Don't be uneasy, mother. What must be, will be."



"Dounia, only think what a position we are in! What if Pyotr

Petrovitch breaks it off?" poor Pulcheria Alexandrovna blurted out,

incautiously.



"He won't be worth much if he does," answered Dounia, sharply and

contemptuously.



"We did well to come away," Pulcheria Alexandrovna hurriedly broke in.

"He was in a hurry about some business or other. If he gets out and

has a breath of air . . . it is fearfully close in his room. . . . But

where is one to get a breath of air here? The very streets here feel

like shut-up rooms. Good heavens! what a town! . . . stay . . . this

side . . . they will crush you--carrying something. Why, it is a piano

they have got, I declare . . . how they push! . . . I am very much

afraid of that young woman, too."



"What young woman, mother?



"Why, that Sofya Semyonovna, who was there just now."



"Why?"



"I have a presentiment, Dounia. Well, you may believe it or not, but

as soon as she came in, that very minute, I felt that she was the

chief cause of the trouble. . . ."



"Nothing of the sort!" cried Dounia, in vexation. "What nonsense, with

your presentiments, mother! He only made her acquaintance the evening

before, and he did not know her when she came in."



"Well, you will see. . . . She worries me; but you will see, you will

see! I was so frightened. She was gazing at me with those eyes. I

could scarcely sit still in my chair when he began introducing her, do

you remember? It seems so strange, but Pyotr Petrovitch writes like

that about her, and he introduces her to us--to you! So he must think

a great deal of her."



"People will write anything. We were talked about and written about,

too. Have you forgotten? I am sure that she is a good girl, and that

it is all nonsense."



"God grant it may be!"



"And Pyotr Petrovitch is a contemptible slanderer," Dounia snapped

out, suddenly.



Pulcheria Alexandrovna was crushed; the conversation was not resumed.



*****



"I will tell you what I want with you," said Raskolnikov, drawing

Razumihin to the window.



"Then I will tell Katerina Ivanovna that you are coming," Sonia said

hurriedly, preparing to depart.



"One minute, Sofya Semyonovna. We have no secrets. You are not in our

way. I want to have another word or two with you. Listen!" he turned

suddenly to Razumihin again. "You know that . . . what's his name

. . . Porfiry Petrovitch?"



"I should think so! He is a relation. Why?" added the latter, with

interest.



"Is not he managing that case . . . you know, about that murder? . . .

You were speaking about it yesterday."



"Yes . . . well?" Razumihin's eyes opened wide.



"He was inquiring for people who had pawned things, and I have some

pledges there, too--trifles--a ring my sister gave me as a keepsake

when I left home, and my father's silver watch--they are only worth

five or six roubles altogether . . . but I value them. So what am I to

do now? I do not want to lose the things, especially the watch. I was

quaking just now, for fear mother would ask to look at it, when we

spoke of Dounia's watch. It is the only thing of father's left us. She

would be ill if it were lost. You know what women are. So tell me what

to do. I know I ought to have given notice at the police station, but

would it not be better to go straight to Porfiry? Eh? What do you

think? The matter might be settled more quickly. You see, mother may

ask for it before dinner."



"Certainly not to the police station. Certainly to Porfiry," Razumihin

shouted in extraordinary excitement. "Well, how glad I am. Let us go

at once. It is a couple of steps. We shall be sure to find him."



"Very well, let us go."



"And he will be very, very glad to make your acquaintance. I have

often talked to him of you at different times. I was speaking of you

yesterday. Let us go. So you knew the old woman? So that's it! It is

all turning out splendidly. . . . Oh, yes, Sofya Ivanovna . . ."



"Sofya Semyonovna," corrected Raskolnikov. "Sofya Semyonovna, this is

my friend Razumihin, and he is a good man."



"If you have to go now," Sonia was beginning, not looking at Razumihin

at all, and still more embarrassed.



"Let us go," decided Raskolnikov. "I will come to you to-day, Sofya

Semyonovna. Only tell me where you live."



He was not exactly ill at ease, but seemed hurried, and avoided her

eyes. Sonia gave her address, and flushed as she did so. They all went

out together.



"Don't you lock up?" asked Razumihin, following him on to the stairs.



"Never," answered Raskolnikov. "I have been meaning to buy a lock for

these two years. People are happy who have no need of locks," he said,

laughing, to Sonia. They stood still in the gateway.



"Do you go to the right, Sofya Semyonovna? How did you find me, by the

 way?" he added, as though he wanted to say something quite different.

 He wanted to look at her soft clear eyes, but this was not easy.



"Why, you gave your address to Polenka yesterday."



"Polenka? Oh, yes; Polenka, that is the little girl. She is your

sister? Did I give her the address?"



"Why, had you forgotten?"



"No, I remember."



"I had heard my father speak of you . . . only I did not know your

name, and he did not know it. And now I came . . . and as I had learnt

your name, I asked to-day, 'Where does Mr. Raskolnikov live?' I did

not know you had only a room too. . . . Good-bye, I will tell Katerina

Ivanovna."



She was extremely glad to escape at last; she went away looking down,

hurrying to get out of sight as soon as possible, to walk the twenty

steps to the turning on the right and to be at last alone, and then

moving rapidly along, looking at no one, noticing nothing, to think,

to remember, to meditate on every word, every detail. Never, never had

she felt anything like this. Dimly and unconsciously a whole new world

was opening before her. She remembered suddenly that Raskolnikov meant

to come to her that day, perhaps at once!



"Only not to-day, please, not to-day!" she kept muttering with a

sinking heart, as though entreating someone, like a frightened child.

"Mercy! to me . . . to that room . . . he will see . . . oh, dear!"



She was not capable at that instant of noticing an unknown gentleman

who was watching her and following at her heels. He had accompanied

her from the gateway. At the moment when Razumihin, Raskolnikov, and

she stood still at parting on the pavement, this gentleman, who was

just passing, started on hearing Sonia's words: "and I asked where Mr.

Raskolnikov lived?" He turned a rapid but attentive look upon all

three, especially upon Raskolnikov, to whom Sonia was speaking; then

looked back and noted the house. All this was done in an instant as he

passed, and trying not to betray his interest, he walked on more

slowly as though waiting for something. He was waiting for Sonia; he

saw that they were parting, and that Sonia was going home.



"Home? Where? I've seen that face somewhere," he thought. "I must find

out."



At the turning he crossed over, looked round, and saw Sonia coming the

same way, noticing nothing. She turned the corner. He followed her on

the other side. After about fifty paces he crossed over again,

overtook her and kept two or three yards behind her.



He was a man about fifty, rather tall and thickly set, with broad high

shoulders which made him look as though he stooped a little. He wore

good and fashionable clothes, and looked like a gentleman of position.

He carried a handsome cane, which he tapped on the pavement at each

step; his gloves were spotless. He had a broad, rather pleasant face

with high cheek-bones and a fresh colour, not often seen in

Petersburg. His flaxen hair was still abundant, and only touched here

and there with grey, and his thick square beard was even lighter than

his hair. His eyes were blue and had a cold and thoughtful look; his

lips were crimson. He was a remarkedly well-preserved man and looked

much younger than his years.



When Sonia came out on the canal bank, they were the only two persons

on the pavement. He observed her dreaminess and preoccupation. On

reaching the house where she lodged, Sonia turned in at the gate; he

followed her, seeming rather surprised. In the courtyard she turned to

the right corner. "Bah!" muttered the unknown gentleman, and mounted

the stairs behind her. Only then Sonia noticed him. She reached the

third storey, turned down the passage, and rang at No. 9. On the door

was inscribed in chalk, "Kapernaumov, Tailor." "Bah!" the stranger

repeated again, wondering at the strange coincidence, and he rang next

door, at No. 8. The doors were two or three yards apart.



"You lodge at Kapernaumov's," he said, looking at Sonia and laughing.

"He altered a waistcoat for me yesterday. I am staying close here at

Madame Resslich's. How odd!" Sonia looked at him attentively.



"We are neighbours," he went on gaily. "I only came to town the day

before yesterday. Good-bye for the present."



Sonia made no reply; the door opened and she slipped in. She felt for

some reason ashamed and uneasy.



*****



On the way to Porfiry's, Razumihin was obviously excited.



"That's capital, brother," he repeated several times, "and I am glad!

I am glad!"



"What are you glad about?" Raskolnikov thought to himself.



"I didn't know that you pledged things at the old woman's, too. And

. . . was it long ago? I mean, was it long since you were there?"



"What a simple-hearted fool he is!"



"When was it?" Raskolnikov stopped still to recollect. "Two or three

days before her death it must have been. But I am not going to redeem

the things now," he put in with a sort of hurried and conspicuous

solicitude about the things. "I've not more than a silver rouble left

. . . after last night's accursed delirium!"



He laid special emphasis on the delirium.



"Yes, yes," Razumihin hastened to agree--with what was not clear.

"Then that's why you . . . were stuck . . . partly . . . you know in

your delirium you were continually mentioning some rings or chains!

Yes, yes . . . that's clear, it's all clear now."



"Hullo! How that idea must have got about among them. Here this man

will go to the stake for me, and I find him delighted at having it

/cleared up/ why I spoke of rings in my delirium! What a hold the idea

must have on all of them!"



"Shall we find him?" he asked suddenly.



"Oh, yes," Razumihin answered quickly. "He is a nice fellow, you will

see, brother. Rather clumsy, that is to say, he is a man of polished

manners, but I mean clumsy in a different sense. He is an intelligent

fellow, very much so indeed, but he has his own range of ideas. . . .

He is incredulous, sceptical, cynical . . . he likes to impose on

people, or rather to make fun of them. His is the old, circumstantial

method. . . . But he understands his work . . . thoroughly. . . . Last

year he cleared up a case of murder in which the police had hardly a

clue. He is very, very anxious to make your acquaintance!"



"On what grounds is he so anxious?"



"Oh, it's not exactly . . . you see, since you've been ill I happen to

have mentioned you several times. . . . So, when he heard about you

. . . about your being a law student and not able to finish your

studies, he said, 'What a pity!' And so I concluded . . . from

everything together, not only that; yesterday Zametov . . . you know,

Rodya, I talked some nonsense on the way home to you yesterday, when I

was drunk . . . I am afraid, brother, of your exaggerating it, you

see."



"What? That they think I am a madman? Maybe they are right," he said

with a constrained smile.



"Yes, yes. . . . That is, pooh, no! . . . But all that I said (and

there was something else too) it was all nonsense, drunken nonsense."



"But why are you apologising? I am so sick of it all!" Raskolnikov

cried with exaggerated irritability. It was partly assumed, however.



"I know, I know, I understand. Believe me, I understand. One's ashamed

to speak of it."



"If you are ashamed, then don't speak of it."



Both were silent. Razumihin was more than ecstatic and Raskolnikov

perceived it with repulsion. He was alarmed, too, by what Razumihin

had just said about Porfiry.



"I shall have to pull a long face with him too," he thought, with a

beating heart, and he turned white, "and do it naturally, too. But the

most natural thing would be to do nothing at all. Carefully do nothing

at all! No, /carefully/ would not be natural again. . . . Oh, well, we

shall see how it turns out. . . . We shall see . . . directly. Is it a

good thing to go or not? The butterfly flies to the light. My heart is

beating, that's what's bad!"



"In this grey house," said Razumihin.



"The most important thing, does Porfiry know that I was at the old

hag's flat yesterday . . . and asked about the blood? I must find that

out instantly, as soon as I go in, find out from his face; otherwise

. . . I'll find out, if it's my ruin."



"I say, brother," he said suddenly, addressing Razumihin, with a sly

smile, "I have been noticing all day that you seem to be curiously

excited. Isn't it so?"



"Excited? Not a bit of it," said Razumihin, stung to the quick.



"Yes, brother, I assure you it's noticeable. Why, you sat on your

chair in a way you never do sit, on the edge somehow, and you seemed

to be writhing all the time. You kept jumping up for nothing. One

moment you were angry, and the next your face looked like a sweetmeat.

You even blushed; especially when you were invited to dinner, you

blushed awfully."



"Nothing of the sort, nonsense! What do you mean?"



"But why are you wriggling out of it, like a schoolboy? By Jove, there

he's blushing again."



"What a pig you are!"



"But why are you so shamefaced about it? Romeo! Stay, I'll tell of you

to-day. Ha-ha-ha! I'll make mother laugh, and someone else,

too . . ."



"Listen, listen, listen, this is serious. . . . What next, you fiend!"

Razumihin was utterly overwhelmed, turning cold with horror. "What

will you tell them? Come, brother . . . foo! what a pig you are!"



"You are like a summer rose. And if only you knew how it suits you; a

Romeo over six foot high! And how you've washed to-day--you cleaned

your nails, I declare. Eh? That's something unheard of! Why, I do

believe you've got pomatum on your hair! Bend down."



"Pig!"



Raskolnikov laughed as though he could not restrain himself. So

laughing, they entered Porfiry Petrovitch's flat. This is what

Raskolnikov wanted: from within they could be heard laughing as they

came in, still guffawing in the passage.



"Not a word here or I'll . . . brain you!" Razumihin whispered

furiously, seizing Raskolnikov by the shoulder.







CHAPTER V



Raskolnikov was already entering the room. He came in looking as

though he had the utmost difficulty not to burst out laughing again.

Behind him Razumihin strode in gawky and awkward, shamefaced and red

as a peony, with an utterly crestfallen and ferocious expression. His

face and whole figure really were ridiculous at that moment and amply

justified Raskolnikov's laughter. Raskolnikov, not waiting for an

introduction, bowed to Porfiry Petrovitch, who stood in the middle of

the room looking inquiringly at them. He held out his hand and shook

hands, still apparently making desperate efforts to subdue his mirth

and utter a few words to introduce himself. But he had no sooner

succeeded in assuming a serious air and muttering something when he

suddenly glanced again as though accidentally at Razumihin, and could

no longer control himself: his stifled laughter broke out the more

irresistibly the more he tried to restrain it. The extraordinary

ferocity with which Razumihin received this "spontaneous" mirth gave

the whole scene the appearance of most genuine fun and naturalness.

Razumihin strengthened this impression as though on purpose.



"Fool! You fiend," he roared, waving his arm which at once struck a

little round table with an empty tea-glass on it. Everything was sent

flying and crashing.



"But why break chairs, gentlemen? You know it's a loss to the Crown,"

Porfiry Petrovitch quoted gaily.



Raskolnikov was still laughing, with his hand in Porfiry Petrovitch's,

but anxious not to overdo it, awaited the right moment to put a

natural end to it. Razumihin, completely put to confusion by upsetting

the table and smashing the glass, gazed gloomily at the fragments,

cursed and turned sharply to the window where he stood looking out

with his back to the company with a fiercely scowling countenance,

seeing nothing. Porfiry Petrovitch laughed and was ready to go on

laughing, but obviously looked for explanations. Zametov had been

sitting in the corner, but he rose at the visitors' entrance and was

standing in expectation with a smile on his lips, though he looked

with surprise and even it seemed incredulity at the whole scene and at

Raskolnikov with a certain embarrassment. Zametov's unexpected

presence struck Raskolnikov unpleasantly.



"I've got to think of that," he thought. "Excuse me, please," he

began, affecting extreme embarrassment. "Raskolnikov."



"Not at all, very pleasant to see you . . . and how pleasantly you've

come in. . . . Why, won't he even say good-morning?" Porfiry

Petrovitch nodded at Razumihin.



"Upon my honour I don't know why he is in such a rage with me. I only

told him as we came along that he was like Romeo . . . and proved it.

And that was all, I think!"



"Pig!" ejaculated Razumihin, without turning round.



"There must have been very grave grounds for it, if he is so furious

at the word," Porfiry laughed.



"Oh, you sharp lawyer! . . . Damn you all!" snapped Razumihin, and

suddenly bursting out laughing himself, he went up to Porfiry with a

more cheerful face as though nothing had happened. "That'll do! We are

all fools. To come to business. This is my friend Rodion Romanovitch

Raskolnikov; in the first place he has heard of you and wants to make

your acquaintance, and secondly, he has a little matter of business

with you. Bah! Zametov, what brought you here? Have you met before?

Have you known each other long?"



"What does this mean?" thought Raskolnikov uneasily.



Zametov seemed taken aback, but not very much so.



"Why, it was at your rooms we met yesterday," he said easily.



"Then I have been spared the trouble. All last week he was begging me

to introduce him to you. Porfiry and you have sniffed each other out

without me. Where is your tobacco?"



Porfiry Petrovitch was wearing a dressing-gown, very clean linen, and

trodden-down slippers. He was a man of about five and thirty, short,

stout even to corpulence, and clean shaven. He wore his hair cut short

and had a large round head, particularly prominent at the back. His

soft, round, rather snub-nosed face was of a sickly yellowish colour,

but had a vigorous and rather ironical expression. It would have been

good-natured except for a look in the eyes, which shone with a watery,

mawkish light under almost white, blinking eyelashes. The expression

of those eyes was strangely out of keeping with his somewhat womanish

figure, and gave it something far more serious than could be guessed

at first sight.



As soon as Porfiry Petrovitch heard that his visitor had a little

matter of business with him, he begged him to sit down on the sofa and

sat down himself on the other end, waiting for him to explain his

business, with that careful and over-serious attention which is at

once oppressive and embarrassing, especially to a stranger, and

especially if what you are discussing is in your opinion of far too

little importance for such exceptional solemnity. But in brief and

coherent phrases Raskolnikov explained his business clearly and

exactly, and was so well satisfied with himself that he even succeeded

in taking a good look at Porfiry. Porfiry Petrovitch did not once take

his eyes off him. Razumihin, sitting opposite at the same table,

listened warmly and impatiently, looking from one to the other every

moment with rather excessive interest.



"Fool," Raskolnikov swore to himself.



"You have to give information to the police," Porfiry replied, with a

most businesslike air, "that having learnt of this incident, that is

of the murder, you beg to inform the lawyer in charge of the case that

such and such things belong to you, and that you desire to redeem them

. . . or . . . but they will write to you."



"That's just the point, that at the present moment," Raskolnikov tried

his utmost to feign embarrassment, "I am not quite in funds . . . and

even this trifling sum is beyond me . . . I only wanted, you see, for

the present to declare that the things are mine, and that when I have

money. . . ."



"That's no matter," answered Porfiry Petrovitch, receiving his

explanation of his pecuniary position coldly, "but you can, if you

prefer, write straight to me, to say, that having been informed of the

matter, and claiming such and such as your property, you beg . . ."



"On an ordinary sheet of paper?" Raskolnikov interrupted eagerly,

again interested in the financial side of the question.



"Oh, the most ordinary," and suddenly Porfiry Petrovitch looked with

obvious irony at him, screwing up his eyes and, as it were, winking at

him. But perhaps it was Raskolnikov's fancy, for it all lasted but a

moment. There was certainly something of the sort, Raskolnikov could

have sworn he winked at him, goodness knows why.



"He knows," flashed through his mind like lightning.



"Forgive my troubling you about such trifles," he went on, a little

disconcerted, "the things are only worth five roubles, but I prize

them particularly for the sake of those from whom they came to me, and

I must confess that I was alarmed when I heard . . ."



"That's why you were so much struck when I mentioned to Zossimov that

Porfiry was inquiring for everyone who had pledges!" Razumihin put in

with obvious intention.



This was really unbearable. Raskolnikov could not help glancing at him

with a flash of vindictive anger in his black eyes, but immediately

recollected himself.



"You seem to be jeering at me, brother?" he said to him, with a well-

feigned irritability. "I dare say I do seem to you absurdly anxious

about such trash; but you mustn't think me selfish or grasping for

that, and these two things may be anything but trash in my eyes. I

told you just now that the silver watch, though it's not worth a cent,

is the only thing left us of my father's. You may laugh at me, but my

mother is here," he turned suddenly to Porfiry, "and if she knew," he

turned again hurriedly to Razumihin, carefully making his voice

tremble, "that the watch was lost, she would be in despair! You know

what women are!"



"Not a bit of it! I didn't mean that at all! Quite the contrary!"

shouted Razumihin distressed.



"Was it right? Was it natural? Did I overdo it?" Raskolnikov asked

himself in a tremor. "Why did I say that about women?"



"Oh, your mother is with you?" Porfiry Petrovitch inquired.



"Yes."



"When did she come?"



"Last night."



Porfiry paused as though reflecting.



"Your things would not in any case be lost," he went on calmly and

coldly. "I have been expecting you here for some time."



And as though that was a matter of no importance, he carefully offered

the ash-tray to Razumihin, who was ruthlessly scattering cigarette ash

over the carpet. Raskolnikov shuddered, but Porfiry did not seem to be

looking at him, and was still concerned with Razumihin's cigarette.



"What? Expecting him? Why, did you know that he had pledges /there/?"

cried Razumihin.



Porfiry Petrovitch addressed himself to Raskolnikov.



"Your things, the ring and the watch, were wrapped up together, and on

the paper your name was legibly written in pencil, together with the

date on which you left them with her . . ."



"How observant you are!" Raskolnikov smiled awkwardly, doing his very

utmost to look him straight in the face, but he failed, and suddenly

added:



"I say that because I suppose there were a great many pledges . . .

that it must be difficult to remember them all. . . . But you remember

them all so clearly, and . . . and . . ."



"Stupid! Feeble!" he thought. "Why did I add that?"



"But we know all who had pledges, and you are the only one who hasn't

come forward," Porfiry answered with hardly perceptible irony.



"I haven't been quite well."



"I heard that too. I heard, indeed, that you were in great distress

about something. You look pale still."



"I am not pale at all. . . . No, I am quite well," Raskolnikov snapped

out rudely and angrily, completely changing his tone. His anger was

mounting, he could not repress it. "And in my anger I shall betray

myself," flashed through his mind again. "Why are they torturing me?"



"Not quite well!" Razumihin caught him up. "What next! He was

unconscious and delirious all yesterday. Would you believe, Porfiry,

as soon as our backs were turned, he dressed, though he could hardly

stand, and gave us the slip and went off on a spree somewhere till

midnight, delirious all the time! Would you believe it!

Extraordinary!"



"Really delirious? You don't say so!" Porfiry shook his head in a

womanish way.



"Nonsense! Don't you believe it! But you don't believe it anyway,"

Raskolnikov let slip in his anger. But Porfiry Petrovitch did not seem

to catch those strange words.



"But how could you have gone out if you hadn't been delirious?"

Razumihin got hot suddenly. "What did you go out for? What was the

object of it? And why on the sly? Were you in your senses when you did

it? Now that all danger is over I can speak plainly."



"I was awfully sick of them yesterday." Raskolnikov addressed Porfiry

suddenly with a smile of insolent defiance, "I ran away from them to

take lodgings where they wouldn't find me, and took a lot of money

with me. Mr. Zametov there saw it. I say, Mr. Zametov, was I sensible

or delirious yesterday; settle our dispute."



He could have strangled Zametov at that moment, so hateful were his

expression and his silence to him.



"In my opinion you talked sensibly and even artfully, but you were

extremely irritable," Zametov pronounced dryly.



"And Nikodim Fomitch was telling me to-day," put in Porfiry

Petrovitch, "that he met you very late last night in the lodging of a

man who had been run over."



"And there," said Razumihin, "weren't you mad then? You gave your last

penny to the widow for the funeral. If you wanted to help, give

fifteen or twenty even, but keep three roubles for yourself at least,

but he flung away all the twenty-five at once!"



"Maybe I found a treasure somewhere and you know nothing of it? So

that's why I was liberal yesterday. . . . Mr. Zametov knows I've found

a treasure! Excuse us, please, for disturbing you for half an hour

with such trivialities," he said, turning to Porfiry Petrovitch, with

trembling lips. "We are boring you, aren't we?"



"Oh no, quite the contrary, quite the contrary! If only you knew how

you interest me! It's interesting to look on and listen . . . and I am

really glad you have come forward at last."



"But you might give us some tea! My throat's dry," cried Razumihin.



"Capital idea! Perhaps we will all keep you company. Wouldn't you like

. . . something more essential before tea?"



"Get along with you!"



Porfiry Petrovitch went out to order tea.



Raskolnikov's thoughts were in a whirl. He was in terrible

exasperation.



"The worst of it is they don't disguise it; they don't care to stand

on ceremony! And how if you didn't know me at all, did you come to

talk to Nikodim Fomitch about me? So they don't care to hide that they

are tracking me like a pack of dogs. They simply spit in my face." He

was shaking with rage. "Come, strike me openly, don't play with me

like a cat with a mouse. It's hardly civil, Porfiry Petrovitch, but

perhaps I won't allow it! I shall get up and throw the whole truth in

your ugly faces, and you'll see how I despise you." He could hardly

breathe. "And what if it's only my fancy? What if I am mistaken, and

through inexperience I get angry and don't keep up my nasty part?

Perhaps it's all unintentional. All their phrases are the usual ones,

but there is something about them. . . . It all might be said, but

there is something. Why did he say bluntly, 'With her'? Why did

Zametov add that I spoke artfully? Why do they speak in that tone?

Yes, the tone. . . . Razumihin is sitting here, why does he see

nothing? That innocent blockhead never does see anything! Feverish

again! Did Porfiry wink at me just now? Of course it's nonsense! What

could he wink for? Are they trying to upset my nerves or are they

teasing me? Either it's ill fancy or they know! Even Zametov is rude.

. . . Is Zametov rude? Zametov has changed his mind. I foresaw he

would change his mind! He is at home here, while it's my first visit.

Porfiry does not consider him a visitor; sits with his back to him.

They're as thick as thieves, no doubt, over me! Not a doubt they were

talking about me before we came. Do they know about the flat? If only

they'd make haste! When I said that I ran away to take a flat he let

it pass. . . . I put that in cleverly about a flat, it may be of use

afterwards. . . . Delirious, indeed . . . ha-ha-ha! He knows all about

last night! He didn't know of my mother's arrival! The hag had written

the date on in pencil! You are wrong, you won't catch me! There are no

facts . . . it's all supposition! You produce facts! The flat even

isn't a fact but delirium. I know what to say to them. . . . Do they

know about the flat? I won't go without finding out. What did I come

for? But my being angry now, maybe is a fact! Fool, how irritable I

am! Perhaps that's right; to play the invalid. . . . He is feeling me.

He will try to catch me. Why did I come?"



All this flashed like lightning through his mind.



Porfiry Petrovitch returned quickly. He became suddenly more jovial.



"Your party yesterday, brother, has left my head rather. . . . And I

am out of sorts altogether," he began in quite a different tone,

laughing to Razumihin.



"Was it interesting? I left you yesterday at the most interesting

point. Who got the best of it?"



"Oh, no one, of course. They got on to everlasting questions, floated

off into space."



"Only fancy, Rodya, what we got on to yesterday. Whether there is such

a thing as crime. I told you that we talked our heads off."



"What is there strange? It's an everyday social question," Raskolnikov

answered casually.



"The question wasn't put quite like that," observed Porfiry.



"Not quite, that's true," Razumihin agreed at once, getting warm and

hurried as usual. "Listen, Rodion, and tell us your opinion, I want to

hear it. I was fighting tooth and nail with them and wanted you to

help me. I told them you were coming. . . . It began with the

socialist doctrine. You know their doctrine; crime is a protest

against the abnormality of the social organisation and nothing more,

and nothing more; no other causes admitted! . . ."



"You are wrong there," cried Porfiry Petrovitch; he was noticeably

animated and kept laughing as he looked at Razumihin, which made him

more excited than ever.



"Nothing is admitted," Razumihin interrupted with heat.



"I am not wrong. I'll show you their pamphlets. Everything with them

is 'the influence of environment,' and nothing else. Their favourite

phrase! From which it follows that, if society is normally organised,

all crime will cease at once, since there will be nothing to protest

against and all men will become righteous in one instant. Human nature

is not taken into account, it is excluded, it's not supposed to exist!

They don't recognise that humanity, developing by a historical living

process, will become at last a normal society, but they believe that a

social system that has come out of some mathematical brain is going to

organise all humanity at once and make it just and sinless in an

instant, quicker than any living process! That's why they

instinctively dislike history, 'nothing but ugliness and stupidity in

it,' and they explain it all as stupidity! That's why they so dislike

the /living/ process of life; they don't want a /living soul/! The

living soul demands life, the soul won't obey the rules of mechanics,

the soul is an object of suspicion, the soul is retrograde! But what

they want though it smells of death and can be made of India-rubber,

at least is not alive, has no will, is servile and won't revolt! And

it comes in the end to their reducing everything to the building of

walls and the planning of rooms and passages in a phalanstery! The

phalanstery is ready, indeed, but your human nature is not ready for

the phalanstery--it wants life, it hasn't completed its vital process,

it's too soon for the graveyard! You can't skip over nature by logic.

Logic presupposes three possibilities, but there are millions! Cut

away a million, and reduce it all to the question of comfort! That's

the easiest solution of the problem! It's seductively clear and you

musn't think about it. That's the great thing, you mustn't think! The

whole secret of life in two pages of print!"



"Now he is off, beating the drum! Catch hold of him, do!" laughed

Porfiry. "Can you imagine," he turned to Raskolnikov, "six people

holding forth like that last night, in one room, with punch as a

preliminary! No, brother, you are wrong, environment accounts for a

great deal in crime; I can assure you of that."



"Oh, I know it does, but just tell me: a man of forty violates a child

of ten; was it environment drove him to it?"



"Well, strictly speaking, it did," Porfiry observed with noteworthy

gravity; "a crime of that nature may be very well ascribed to the

influence of environment."



Razumihin was almost in a frenzy. "Oh, if you like," he roared. "I'll

prove to you that your white eyelashes may very well be ascribed to

the Church of Ivan the Great's being two hundred and fifty feet high,

and I will prove it clearly, exactly, progressively, and even with a

Liberal tendency! I undertake to! Will you bet on it?"



"Done! Let's hear, please, how he will prove it!"



"He is always humbugging, confound him," cried Razumihin, jumping up

and gesticulating. "What's the use of talking to you? He does all that

on purpose; you don't know him, Rodion! He took their side yesterday,

simply to make fools of them. And the things he said yesterday! And

they were delighted! He can keep it up for a fortnight together. Last

year he persuaded us that he was going into a monastery: he stuck to

it for two months. Not long ago he took it into his head to declare he

was going to get married, that he had everything ready for the

wedding. He ordered new clothes indeed. We all began to congratulate

him. There was no bride, nothing, all pure fantasy!"



"Ah, you are wrong! I got the clothes before. It was the new clothes

in fact that made me think of taking you in."



"Are you such a good dissembler?" Raskolnikov asked carelessly.



"You wouldn't have supposed it, eh? Wait a bit, I shall take you in,

too. Ha-ha-ha! No, I'll tell you the truth. All these questions about

crime, environment, children, recall to my mind an article of yours

which interested me at the time. 'On Crime' . . . or something of the

sort, I forget the title, I read it with pleasure two months ago in

the /Periodical Review/."



"My article? In the /Periodical Review/?" Raskolnikov asked in

astonishment. "I certainly did write an article upon a book six months

ago when I left the university, but I sent it to the /Weekly Review/."



"But it came out in the /Periodical/."



"And the /Weekly Review/ ceased to exist, so that's why it wasn't

printed at the time."



"That's true; but when it ceased to exist, the /Weekly Review/ was

amalgamated with the /Periodical/, and so your article appeared two

months ago in the latter. Didn't you know?"



Raskolnikov had not known.



"Why, you might get some money out of them for the article! What a

strange person you are! You lead such a solitary life that you know

nothing of matters that concern you directly. It's a fact, I assure

you."



"Bravo, Rodya! I knew nothing about it either!" cried Razumihin. "I'll

run to-day to the reading-room and ask for the number. Two months ago?

What was the date? It doesn't matter though, I will find it. Think of

not telling us!"



"How did you find out that the article was mine? It's only signed with

an initial."



"I only learnt it by chance, the other day. Through the editor; I know

him. . . . I was very much interested."



"I analysed, if I remember, the psychology of a criminal before and

after the crime."



"Yes, and you maintained that the perpetration of a crime is always

accompanied by illness. Very, very original, but . . . it was not that

part of your arhem and to teach them their place, but no

more; in fact, even this isn't necessary as they castigate themselves,

for they are very conscientious: some perform this service for one

another and others chastise themselves with their own hands. . . .

They will impose various public acts of penitence upon themselves with

a beautiful and edifying effect; in fact you've nothing to be uneasy

about. . . . It's a law of nature."



"Well, you have certainly set my mind more at rest on that score; but

there's another thing worries me. Tell me, please, are there many

people who have the right to kill others, these extraordinary people?

I am ready to bow down to them, of course, but you must admit it's

alarming if there are a great many of them, eh?"



"Oh, you needn't worry about that either," Raskolnikov went on in the

same tone. "People with new ideas, people with the faintest capacity

for saying something /new/, are extremely few in number,

extraordinarily so in fact. One thing only is clear, that the

appearance of all these grades and sub-divisions of men must follow

with unfailing regularity some law of nature. That law, of course, is

unknown at present, but I am convinced that it exists, and one day may

become known. The vast mass of mankind is mere material, and only

exists in order by some great effort, by some mysterious process, by

means of some crossing of races and stocks, to bring into the world at

last perhaps one man out of a thousand with a spark of independence.

One in ten thousand perhaps--I speak roughly, approximately--is born

with some independence, and with still greater independence one in a

hundred thousand. The man of genius is one of millions, and the great

geniuses, the crown of humanity, appear on earth perhaps one in many

thousand millions. In fact I have not peeped into the retort in which

all this takes place. But there certainly is and must be a definite

law, it cannot be a matter of chance."



"Why, are you both joking?" Razumihin cried at last. "There you sit,

making fun of one another. Are you serious, Rodya?"



Raskolnikov raised his pale and almost mournful face and made no

reply. And the unconcealed, persistent, nervous, and /discourteous/

sarcasm of Porfiry seemed strange to Razumihin beside that quiet and

mournful face.



"Well, brother, if you are really serious . . . You are right, of

course, in saying that it's not new, that it's like what we've read

and heard a thousand times already; but what is really original in all

this, and is exclusively your own, to my horror, is that you sanction

bloodshed /in the name of conscience/, and, excuse my saying so, with

such fanaticism. . . . That, I take it, is the point of your article.

But that sanction of bloodshed /by conscience/ is to my mind . . .

more terrible than the official, legal sanction of bloodshed. . . ."



"You are quite right, it is more terrible," Porfiry agreed.



"Yes, you must have exaggerated! There is some mistake, I shall read

it. You can't think that! I shall read it."



"All that is not in the article, there's only a hint of it," said

Raskolnikov.



"Yes, yes." Porfiry couldn't sit still. "Your attitude to crime is

pretty clear to me now, but . . . excuse me for my impertinence (I am

really ashamed to be worrying you like this), you see, you've removed

my anxiety as to the two grades getting mixed, but . . . there are

various practical possibilities that make me uneasy! What if some man

or youth imagines that he is a Lycurgus or Mahomet--a future one of

course--and suppose he begins to remove all obstacles. . . . He has

some great enterprise before him and needs money for it . . . and

tries to get it . . . do you see?"



Zametov gave a sudden guffaw in his corner. Raskolnikov did not even

raise his eyes to him.



"I must admit," he went on calmly, "that such cases certainly must

arise. The vain and foolish are particularly apt to fall into that

snare; young people especially."



"Yes, you see. Well then?"



"What then?" Raskolnikov smiled in reply; "that's not my fault. So it

is and so it always will be. He said just now (he nodded at Razumihin)

that I sanction bloodshed. Society is too well protected by prisons,

banishment, criminal investigators, penal servitude. There's no need

to be uneasy. You have but to catch the thief."



"And what if we do catch him?"



"Then he gets what he deserves."



"You are certainly logical. But what of his conscience?"



"Why do you care about that?"



"Simply from humanity."



"If he has a conscience he will suffer for his mistake. That will be

his punishment--as well as the prison."



"But the real geniuses," asked Razumihin frowning, "those who have the

right to murder? Oughtn't they to suffer at all even for the blood

they've shed?"



"Why the word /ought/? It's not a matter of permission or prohibition.

He will suffer if he is sorry for his victim. Pain and suffering are

always inevitable for a large intelligence and a deep heart. The

really great men must, I think, have great sadness on earth," he added

dreamily, not in the tone of the conversation.



He raised his eyes, looked earnestly at them all, smiled, and took his

cap. He was too quiet by comparison with his manner at his entrance,

and he felt this. Everyone got up.



"Well, you may abuse me, be angry with me if you like," Porfiry

Petrovitch began again, "but I can't resist. Allow me one little

question (I know I am troubling you). There is just one little notion

I want to express, simply that I may not forget it."



"Very good, tell me your little notion," Raskolnikov stood waiting,

pale and grave before him.



"Well, you see . . . I really don't know how to express it properly.

. . . It's a playful, psychological idea. . . . When you were writing

your article, surely you couldn't have helped, he-he! fancying

yourself . . . just a little, an 'extraordinary' man, uttering a /new

word/ in your sense. . . . That's so, isn't it?"



"Quite possibly," Raskolnikov answered contemptuously.



Razumihin made a movement.



"And, if so, could you bring yourself in case of worldly difficulties

and hardship or for some service to humanity--to overstep obstacles?

. . . For instance, to rob and murder?"



And again he winked with his left eye, and laughed noiselessly just as

before.



"If I did I certainly should not tell you," Raskolnikov answered with

defiant and haughty contempt.



"No, I was only interested on account of your article, from a literary

point of view . . ."



"Foo! how obvious and insolent that is!" Raskolnikov thought with

repulsion.



"Allow me to observe," he answered dryly, "that I don't consider

myself a Mahomet or a Napoleon, nor any personage of that kind, and

not being one of them I cannot tell you how I should act."



"Oh, come, don't we all think ourselves Napoleons now in Russia?"

Porfiry Petrovitch said with alarming familiarity.



Something peculiar betrayed itself in the very intonation of his

voice.



"Perhaps it was one of these future Napoleons who did for Alyona

Ivanovna last week?" Zametov blurted out from the corner.



Raskolnikov did not speak, but looked firmly and intently at Porfiry.

Razumihin was scowling gloomily. He seemed before this to be noticing

something. He looked angrily around. There was a minute of gloomy

silence. Raskolnikov turned to go.



"Are you going already?" Porfiry said amiably, holding out his hand

with excessive politeness. "Very, very glad of your acquaintance. As

for your request, have no uneasiness, write just as I told you, or,

better still, come to me there yourself in a day or two . . .

to-morrow, indeed. I shall be there at eleven o'clock for certain.

We'll arrange it all; we'll have a talk. As one of the last to be

/there/, you might perhaps be able to tell us something," he added

with a most good-natured expression.



"You want to cross-examine me officially in due form?" Raskolnikov

asked sharply.



"Oh, why? That's not necessary for the present. You misunderstand me.

I lose no opportunity, you see, and . . . I've talked with all who had

pledges. . . . I obtained evidence from some of them, and you are the

last. . . . Yes, by the way," he cried, seemingly suddenly delighted,

"I just remember, what was I thinking of?" he turned to Razumihin,

"you were talking my ears off about that Nikolay . . . of course, I

know, I know very well," he turned to Raskolnikov, "that the fellow is

innocent, but what is one to do? We had to trouble Dmitri too. . . .

This is the point, this is all: when you went up the stairs it was

past seven, wasn't it?"



"Yes," answered Raskolnikov, with an unpleasant sensation at the very

moment he spoke that he need not have said it.



"Then when you went upstairs between seven and eight, didn't you see

in a flat that stood open on a second storey, do you remember? two

workmen or at least one of them? They were painting there, didn't you

notice them? It's very, very important for them."



"Painters? No, I didn't see them," Raskolnikov answered slowly, as

though ransacking his memory, while at the same instant he was racking

every nerve, almost swooning with anxiety to conjecture as quickly as

possible where the trap lay and not to overlook anything. "No, I

didn't see them, and I don't think I noticed a flat like that open.

. . . But on the fourth storey" (he had mastered the trap now and was

triumphant) "I remember now that someone was moving out of the flat

opposite Alyona Ivanovna's. . . . I remember . . . I remember it

clearly. Some porters were carrying out a sofa and they squeezed me

against the wall. But painters . . . no, I don't remember that there

were any painters, and I don't think that there was a flat open

anywhere, no, there wasn't."



"What do you mean?" Razumihin shouted suddenly, as though he had

reflected and realised. "Why, it was on the day of the murder the

painters were at work, and he was there three days before? What are

you asking?"



"Foo! I have muddled it!" Porfiry slapped himself on the forehead.

"Deuce take it! This business is turning my brain!" he addressed

Raskolnikov somewhat apologetically. "It would be such a great thing

for us to find out whether anyone had seen them between seven and

eight at the flat, so I fancied you could perhaps have told us

something. . . . I quite muddled it."



"Then you should be more careful," Razumihin observed grimly.



The last words were uttered in the passage. Porfiry Petrovitch saw

them to the door with excessive politeness.



They went out into the street gloomy and sullen, and for some steps

they did not say a word. Raskolnikov drew a deep breath.







CHAPTER VI



"I don't believe it, I can't believe it!" repeated Razumihin, trying

in perplexity to refute Raskolnikov's arguments.



They were by now approaching Bakaleyev's lodgings, where Pulcheria

Alexandrovna and Dounia had been expecting them a long while.

Razumihin kept stopping on the way in the heat of discussion, confused

and excited by the very fact that they were for the first time

speaking openly about /it/.



"Don't believe it, then!" answered Raskolnikov, with a cold, careless

smile. "You were noticing nothing as usual, but I was weighing every

word."



"You are suspicious. That is why you weighed their words . . . h'm

. . . certainly, I agree, Porfiry's tone was rather strange, and still

more that wretch Zametov! . . . You are right, there was something

about him--but why? Why?"



"He has changed his mind since last night."



"Quite the contrary! If they had that brainless idea, they would do

their utmost to hide it, and conceal their cards, so as to catch you

afterwards. . . . But it was all impudent and careless."



"If they had had facts--I mean, real facts--or at least grounds for

suspicion, then they would certainly have tried to hide their game, in

the hope of getting more (they would have made a search long ago

besides). But they have no facts, not one. It is all mirage--all

ambiguous. Simply a floating idea. So they try to throw me out by

impudence. And perhaps, he was irritated at having no facts, and

blurted it out in his vexation--or perhaps he has some plan . . . he

seems an intelligent man. Perhaps he wanted to frighten me by

pretending to know. They have a psychology of their own, brother. But

it is loathsome explaining it all. Stop!"



"And it's insulting, insulting! I understand you. But . . . since we

have spoken openly now (and it is an excellent thing that we have at

last--I am glad) I will own now frankly that I noticed it in them long

ago, this idea. Of course the merest hint only--an insinuation--but

why an insinuation even? How dare they? What foundation have they? If

only you knew how furious I have been. Think only! Simply because a

poor student, unhinged by poverty and hypochondria, on the eve of a

severe delirious illness (note that), suspicious, vain, proud, who has

not seen a soul to speak to for six months, in rags and in boots

without soles, has to face some wretched policemen and put up with

their insolence; and the unexpected debt thrust under his nose, the

I.O.U. presented by Tchebarov, the new paint, thirty degrees Reaumur

and a stifling atmosphere, a crowd of people, the talk about the

murder of a person where he had been just before, and all that on an

empty stomach--he might well have a fainting fit! And that, that is

what they found it all on! Damn them! I understand how annoying it is,

but in your place, Rodya, I would laugh at them, or better still, spit

in their ugly faces, and spit a dozen times in all directions. I'd hit

out in all directions, neatly too, and so I'd put an end to it. Damn

them! Don't be downhearted. It's a shame!"



"He really has put it well, though," Raskolnikov thought.



"Damn them? But the cross-examination again, to-morrow?" he said with

bitterness. "Must I really enter into explanations with them? I feel

vexed as it is, that I condescended to speak to Zametov yesterday in

the restaurant. . . ."



"Damn it! I will go myself to Porfiry. I will squeeze it out of him,

as one of the family: he must let me know the ins and outs of it all!

And as for Zametov . . ."



"At last he sees through him!" thought Raskolnikov.



"Stay!" cried Razumihin, seizing him by the shoulder again. "Stay! you

were wrong. I have thought it out. You are wrong! How was that a trap?

You say that the question about the workmen was a trap. But if you had

done /that/, could you have said you had seen them painting the flat

. . . and the workmen? On the contrary, you would have seen nothing,

even if you had seen it. Who would own it against himself?"



"If I had done /that thing/, I should certainly have said that I had

seen the workmen and the flat," Raskolnikov answered, with reluctance

and obvious disgust.



"But why speak against yourself?"



"Because only peasants, or the most inexperienced novices deny

everything flatly at examinations. If a man is ever so little

developed and experienced, he will certainly try to admit all the

external facts that can't be avoided, but will seek other explanations

of them, will introduce some special, unexpected turn, that will give

them another significance and put them in another light. Porfiry might

well reckon that I should be sure to answer so, and say I had seen

them to give an air of truth, and then make some explanation."



"But he would have told you at once that the workmen could not have

been there two days before, and that therefore you must have been

there on the day of the murder at eight o'clock. And so he would have

caught you over a detail."



"Yes, that is what he was reckoning on, that I should not have time to

reflect, and should be in a hurry to make the most likely answer, and

so would forget that the workmen could not have been there two days

before."



"But how could you forget it?"



"Nothing easier. It is in just such stupid things clever people are

most easily caught. The more cunning a man is, the less he suspects

that he will be caught in a simple thing. The more cunning a man is,

the simpler the trap he must be caught in. Porfiry is not such a fool

as you think. . . ."



"He is a knave then, if that is so!"



Raskolnikov could not help laughing. But at the very moment, he was

struck by the strangeness of his own frankness, and the eagerness with

which he had made this explanation, though he had kept up all the

preceding conversation with gloomy repulsion, obviously with a motive,

from necessity.



"I am getting a relish for certain aspects!" he thought to himself.

But almost at the same instant he became suddenly uneasy, as though an

unexpected and alarming idea had occurred to him. His uneasiness kept

on increasing. They had just reached the entrance to Bakaleyev's.



"Go in alone!" said Raskolnikov suddenly. "I will be back directly."



"Where are you going? Why, we are just here."



"I can't help it. . . . I will come in half an hour. Tell them."



"Say what you like, I will come with you."



"You, too, want to torture me!" he screamed, with such bitter

irritation, such despair in his eyes that Razumihin's hands dropped.

He stood for some time on the steps, looking gloomily at Raskolnikov

striding rapidly away in the direction of his lodging. At last,

gritting his teeth and clenching his fist, he swore he would squeeze

Porfiry like a lemon that very day, and went up the stairs to reassure

Pulcheria Alexandrovna, who was by now alarmed at their long absence.



When Raskolnikov got home, his hair was soaked with sweat and he was

breathing heavily. He went rapidly up the stairs, walked into his

unlocked room and at once fastened the latch. Then in senseless terror

he rushed to the corner, to that hole under the paper where he had put

the things; put his hand in, and for some minutes felt carefully in

the hole, in every crack and fold of the paper. Finding nothing, he

got up and drew a deep breath. As he was reaching the steps of

Bakaleyev's, he suddenly fancied that something, a chain, a stud or

even a bit of paper in which they had been wrapped with the old

woman's handwriting on it, might somehow have slipped out and been

lost in some crack, and then might suddenly turn up as unexpected,

conclusive evidence against him.



He stood as though lost in thought, and a strange, humiliated, half

senseless smile strayed on his lips. He took his cap at last and went

quietly out of the room. His ideas were all tangled. He went dreamily

through the gateway.



"Here he is himself," shouted a loud voice.



He raised his head.



The porter was standing at the door of his little room and was

pointing him out to a short man who looked like an artisan, wearing

a long coat and a waistcoat, and looking at a distance remarkably like

a woman. He stooped, and his head in a greasy cap hung forward. From

his wrinkled flabby face he looked over fifty; his little eyes were

lost in fat and they looked out grimly, sternly and discontentedly.



"What is it?" Raskolnikov asked, going up to the porter.



The man stole a look at him from under his brows and he looked at him

attentively, deliberately; then he turned slowly and went out of the

gate into the street without saying a word.



"What is it?" cried Raskolnikov.



"Why, he there was asking whether a student lived here, mentioned your

name and whom you lodged with. I saw you coming and pointed you out

and he went away. It's funny."



The porter too seemed rather puzzled, but not much so, and after

wondering for a moment he turned and went back to his room.



Raskolnikov ran after the stranger, and at once caught sight of him

walking along the other side of the street with the same even,

deliberate step with his eyes fixed on the ground, as though in

meditation. He soon overtook him, but for some time walked behind him.

At last, moving on to a level with him, he looked at his face. The man

noticed him at once, looked at him quickly, but dropped his eyes

again; and so they walked for a minute side by side without uttering a

word.



"You were inquiring for me . . . of the porter?" Raskolnikov said at

last, but in a curiously quiet voice.



The man made no answer; he didn't even look at him. Again they were

both silent.



"Why do you . . . come and ask for me . . . and say nothing. . . .

What's the meaning of it?"



Raskolnikov's voice broke and he seemed unable to articulate the words

clearly.



The man raised his eyes this time and turned a gloomy sinister look at

Raskolnikov.



"Murderer!" he said suddenly in a quiet but clear and distinct voice.



Raskolnikov went on walking beside him. His legs felt suddenly weak, a

cold shiver ran down his spine, and his heart seemed to stand still

for a moment, then suddenly began throbbing as though it were set

free. So they walked for about a hundred paces, side by side in

silence.



The man did not look at him.



"What do you mean . . . what is. . . . Who is a murderer?" muttered

Raskolnikov hardly audibly.



"/You/ are a murderer," the man answered still more articulately and

emphatically, with a smile of triumphant hatred, and again he looked

straight into Raskolnikov's pale face and stricken eyes.



They had just reached the cross-roads. The man turned to the left

without looking behind him. Raskolnikov remained standing, gazing

after him. He saw him turn round fifty paces away and look back at him

still standing there. Raskolnikov could not see clearly, but he

fancied that he was again smiling the same smile of cold hatred and

triumph.



With slow faltering steps, with shaking knees, Raskolnikov made his

way back to his little garret, feeling chilled all over. He took off

his cap and put it on the table, and for ten minutes he stood without

moving. Then he sank exhausted on the sofa and with a weak moan of

pain he stretched himself on it. So he lay for half an hour.



He thought of nothing. Some thoughts or fragments of thoughts, some

images without order or coherence floated before his mind--faces of

people he had seen in his childhood or met somewhere once, whom he

would never have recalled, the belfry of the church at V., the

billiard table in a restaurant and some officers playing billiards,

the smell of cigars in some underground tobacco shop, a tavern room, a

back staircase quite dark, all sloppy with dirty water and strewn with

egg-shells, and the Sunday bells floating in from somewhere. . . . The

images followed one another, whirling like a hurricane. Some of them

he liked and tried to clutch at, but they faded and all the while

there was an oppression within him, but it was not overwhelming,

sometimes it was even pleasant. . . . The slight shivering still

persisted, but that too was an almost pleasant sensation.



He heard the hurried footsteps of Razumihin; he closed his eyes and

pretended to be asleep. Razumihin opened the door and stood for some

time in the doorway as though hesitating, then he stepped softly into

the room and went cautiously to the sofa. Raskolnikov heard Nastasya's

whisper:



"Don't disturb him! Let him sleep. He can have his dinner later."



"Quite so," answered Razumihin. Both withdrew carefully and closed the

door. Another half-hour passed. Raskolnikov opened his eyes, turned on

his back again, clasping his hands behind his head.



"Who is he? Who is that man who sprang out of the earth? Where was he,

what did he see? He has seen it all, that's clear. Where was he then?

And from where did he see? Why has he only now sprung out of the

earth? And how could he see? Is it possible? Hm . . ." continued

Raskolnikov, turning cold and shivering, "and the jewel case Nikolay

found behind the door--was that possible? A clue? You miss an

infinitesimal line and you can build it into a pyramid of evidence! A

fly flew by and saw it! Is it possible?" He felt with sudden loathing

how weak, how physically weak he had become. "I ought to have known

it," he thought with a bitter smile. "And how dared I, knowing myself,

knowing how I should be, take up an axe and shed blood! I ought to

have known beforehand. . . . Ah, but I did know!" he whispered in

despair. At times he came to a standstill at some thought.



"No, those men are not made so. The real /Master/ to whom all is

permitted storms Toulon, makes a massacre in Paris,an hour later, they were all engaged in a lively

conversation. Even Raskolnikov listened attentively for some time,

though he did not talk. Razumihin was the speaker.



"And why, why should you go away?" he flowed on ecstatically. "And

what are you to do in a little town? The great thing is, you are all

here together and you need one another--you do need one another,

believe me. For a time, anyway. . . . Take me into partnership, and I

assure you we'll plan a capital enterprise. Listen! I'll explain it

all in detail to you, the whole project! It all flashed into my head

this morning, before anything had happened . . . I tell you what; I

have an uncle, I must introduce him to you (a most accommodating and

respectable old man). This uncle has got a capital of a thousand

roubles, and he lives on his pension and has no need of that money.

For the last two years he has been bothering me to borrow it from him

and pay him six per cent. interest. I know what that means; he simply

wants to help me. Last year I had no need of it, but this year I

resolved to borrow it as soon as he arrived. Then you lend me another

thousand of your three and we have enough for a start, so we'll go

into partnership, and what are we going to do?"



Then Razumihin began to unfold his project, and he explained at length

that almost all our publishers and booksellers know nothing at all of

what they are selling, and for that reason they are usually bad

publishers, and that any decent publications pay as a rule and give a

profit, sometimes a considerable one. Razumihin had, indeed, been

dreaming of setting up as a publisher. For the last two years he had

been working in publishers' offices, and knew three European languages

well, though he had told Raskolnikov six days before that he was

"schwach" in German with an object of persuading him to take half his

translation and half the payment for it. He had told a lie then, and

Raskolnikov knew he was lying.



"Why, why should we let our chance slip when we have one of the chief

means of success--money of our own!" cried Razumihin warmly. "Of

course there will be a lot of work, but we will work, you, Avdotya

Romanovna, I, Rodion. . . . You get a splendid profit on some books

nowadays! And the great point of the business is that we shall know

just what wants translating, and we shall be translating, publishing,

learning all at once. I can be of use because I have experience. For

nearly two years I've been scuttling about among the publishers, and

now I know every detail of their business. You need not be a saint to

make pots, believe me! And why, why should we let our chance slip!

Why, I know--and I kept the secret--two or three books which one might

get a hundred roubles simply for thinking of translating and

publishing. Indeed, and I would not take five hundred for the very

idea of one of them. And what do you think? If I were to tell a

publisher, I dare say he'd hesitate--they are such blockheads! And as

for the business side, printing, paper, selling, you trust to me, I

know my way about. We'll begin in a small way and go on to a large. In

any case it will get us our living and we shall get back our capital."



Dounia's eyes shone.



"I like what you are saying, Dmitri Prokofitch!" she said.



"I know nothing about it, of course," put in Pulcheria Alexandrovna,

"it may be a good idea, but again God knows. It's new and untried. Of

course, we must remain here at least for a time." She looked at Rodya.



"What do you think, brother?" said Dounia.



"I think he's got a very good idea," he answered. "Of course, it's too

soon to dream of a publishing firm, but we certainly might bring out

five or six books and be sure of success. I know of one book myself

which would be sure to go well. And as for his being able to manage

it, there's no doubt about that either. He knows the business. . . .

But we can talk it over later. . . ."



"Hurrah!" cried Razumihin. "Now, stay, there's a flat here in this

house, belonging to the same owner. It's a special flat apart, not

communicating with these lodgings. It's furnished, rent moderate,

three rooms. Suppose you take them to begin with. I'll pawn your watch

to-morrow and bring you the money, and everything can be arranged

then. You can all three live together, and Rodya will be with you. But

where are you off to, Rodya?"



"What, Rodya, you are going already?" Pulcheria Alexandrovna asked in

dismay.



"At such a minute?" cried Razumihin.



Dounia looked at her brother with incredulous wonder. He held his cap

in his hand, he was preparing to leave them.



"One would think you were burying me or saying good-bye for ever," he

said somewhat oddly. He attempted to smile, but it did not turn out a

smile. "But who knows, perhaps it is the last time we shall see each

other . . ." he let slip accidentally. It was what he was thinking,

and it somehow was uttered aloud.



"What is the matter with you?" cried his mother.



"Where are you going, Rodya?" asked Dounia rather strangely.



"Oh, I'm quite obliged to . . ." he answered vaguely, as though

hesitating what he would say. But there was a look of sharp

determination in his white face.



"I meant to say . . . as I was coming here . . . I meant to tell you,

mother, and you, Dounia, that it would be better for us to part for a

time. I feel ill, I am not at peace. . . . I will come afterwards, I

will come of myself . . . when it's possible. I remember you and love

you. . . . Leave me, leave me alone. I decided this even before . . .

I'm absolutely resolved on it. Whatever may come to me, whether I come

to ruin or not, I want to be alone. Forget me altogether, it's better.

Don't inquire about me. When I can, I'll come of myself or . . . I'll

send for you. Perhaps it will all come back, but now if you love me,

give me up . . . else I shall begin to hate you, I feel it. . . .

Good-bye!"



"Good God!" cried Pulcheria Alexandrovna. Both his mother and his

sister were terribly alarmed. Razumihin was also.



"Rodya, Rodya, be reconciled with us! Let us be as before!" cried his

poor mother.



He turned slowly to the door and slowly went out of the room. Dounia

overtook him.



"Brother, what are you doing to mother?" she whispered, her eyes

flashing with indignation.



He looked dully at her.



"No matter, I shall come. . . . I'm coming," he muttered in an

undertone, as though not fully conscious of what he was saying, and he

went out of the room.



"Wicked, heartless egoist!" cried Dounia.



"He is insane, but not heartless. He is mad! Don't you see it? You're

heartless after that!" Razumihin whispered in her ear, squeezing her

hand tightly. "I shall be back directly," he shouted to the horror-

stricken mother, and he ran out of the room.



Raskolnikov was waiting for him at the end of the passage.



"I knew you would run after me," he said. "Go back to them--be with

them . . . be with them to-morrow and always. . . . I . . . perhaps I

shall come . . . if I can. Good-bye."



And without holding out his hand he walked away.



"But where are you going? What are you doing? What's the matter with

you? How can you go on like this?" Razumihin muttered, at his wits'

end.



Raskolnikov stopped once more.



"Once for all, never ask me about anything. I have nothing to tell

you. Don't come to see me. Maybe I'll come here. . . . Leave me, but

/don't leave/ them. Do you understand me?"



It was dark in the corridor, they were standing near the lamp. For a

minute they were looking at one another in silence. Razumihin

remembered that minute all his life. Raskolnikov's burning and intent

eyes grew more penetrating every moment, piercing into his soul, into

his consciousness. Suddenly Razumihin started. Something strange, as

it were, passed between them. . . . Some idea, some hint, as it were,

slipped, something awful, hideous, and suddenly understood on both

sides. . . . Razumihin turned pale.



"Do you understand now?" said Raskolnikov, his face twitching

nervously. "Go back, go to them," he said suddenly, and turning

quickly, he went out of the house.



I will not attempt to describe how Razumihin went back to the ladies,

how he soothed them, how he protested that Rodya needed rest in his

illness, protested that Rodya was sure to come, that he would come

every day, that he was very, very much upset, that he must not be

irritated, that he, Razumihin, would watch over him, would get him a

doctor, the best doctor, a consultation. . . . In fact from that

evening Razumihin took his place with them as a son and a brother.







CHAPTER IV



Raskolnikov went straight to the house on the canal bank where Sonia

lived. It was an old green house of three storeys. He found the porter

and obtained from him vague directions as to the whereabouts of

Kapernaumov, the tailor. Having found in the corner of the courtyard

the entrance to the dark and narrow staircase, he mounted to the

second floor and came out into a gallery that ran round the whole

second storey over the yard. While he was wandering in the darkness,

uncertain where to turn for Kapernaumov's door, a door opened three

paces from him; he mechanically took hold of it.



"Who is there?" a woman's voice asked uneasily.



"It's I . . . come to see you," answered Raskolnikov and he walked

into the tiny entry.



On a broken chair stood a candle in a battered copper candlestick.



"It's you! Good heavens!" cried Sonia weakly, and she stood rooted to

the spot.



"Which is your room? This way?" and Raskolnikov, trying not to look at

her, hastened in.



A minute later Sonia, too, came in with the candle, set down the

candlestick and, completely disconcerted, stood before him

inexpressibly agitated and apparently frightened by his unexpected

visit. The colour rushed suddenly to her pale face and tears came into

her eyes . . . She felt sick and ashamed and happy, too. . . .

Raskolnikov turned away quickly and sat on a chair by the table. He

scanned the room in a rapid glance.



It was a large but exceedingly low-pitched room, the only one let by

the Kapernaumovs, to whose rooms a closed door led in the wall on the

left. In the opposite side on the right hand wall was another door,

always kept locked. That led to the next flat, which formed a separate

lodging. Sonia's room looked like a barn; it was a very irregular

quadrangle and this gave it a grotesque appearance. A wall with three

windows looking out on to the canal ran aslant so that one corner

formed a very acute angle, and it was difficult to see in it without

very strong light. The other corner was disproportionately obtuse.

There was scarcely any furniture in the big room: in the corner on the

right was a bedstead, beside it, nearest the door, a chair. A plain,

deal table covered by a blue cloth stood against the same wall, close

to the door into the other flat. Two rush-bottom chairs stood by the

table. On the opposite wall near the acute angle stood a small plain

wooden chest of drawers looking, as it were, lost in a desert. That

was all there was in the room. The yellow, scratched and shabby wall-

paper was black in the corners. It must have been damp and full of

fumes in the winter. There was every sign of poverty; even the

bedstead had no curtain.



Sonia looked in silence at her visitor, who was so attentively and

unceremoniously scrutinising her room, and even began at last to

tremble with terror, as though she was standing before her judge and

the arbiter of her destinies.



"I am late. . . . It's eleven, isn't it?" he asked, still not lifting

his eyes.



"Yes," muttered Sonia, "oh yes, it is," she added, hastily, as though

in that lay her means of escape. "My landlady's clock has just struck

. . . I heard it myself. . . ."



"I've come to you for the last time," Raskolnikov went on gloomily,

although this was the first time. "I may perhaps not see you

again . . ."



"Are you . . . going away?"



"I don't know . . . to-morrow. . . ."



"Then you are not coming to Katerina Ivanovna to-morrow?" Sonia's

voice shook.



"I don't know. I shall know to-morrow morning. . . . Never mind that:

I've come to say one word. . . ."



He raised his brooding eyes to her and suddenly noticed that he was

sitting down while she was all the while standing before him.



"Why are you standing? Sit down," he said in a changed voice, gentle

and friendly.



She sat down. He looked kindly and almost compassionately at her.



"How thin you are! What a hand! Quite transparent, like a dead hand."



He took her hand. Sonia smiled faintly.



"I have always been like that," she said.



"Even when you lived at home?"



"Yes."



"Of course, you were," he added abruptly and the expression of his

face and the sound of his voice changed again suddenly.



He looked round him once more.



"You rent this room from the Kapernaumovs?"



"Yes. . . ."



"They live there, through that door?"



"Yes. . . . They have another room like this."



"All in one room?"



"Yes."



"I should be afraid in your room at night," he observed gloomily.



"They are very good people, very kind," answered Sonia, who still

seemed bewildered, "and all the furniture, everything . . . everything

is theirs. And they are very kind and the children, too, often come to

see me."



"They all stammer, don't they?"



"Yes. . . . He stammers and he's lame. And his wife, too. . . . It's

not exactly that she stammers, but she can't speak plainly. She is a

very kind woman. And he used to be a house serf. And there are seven

children . . . and it's only the eldest one that stammers and the

others are simply ill . . . but they don't stammer. . . . But where

did you hear about them?" she added with some surprise.



"Your father told me, then. He told me all about you. . . . And how

you went out at six o'clock and came back at nine and how Katerina

Ivanovna knelt down by your bed."



Sonia was confused.



"I fancied I saw him to-day," she whispered hesitatingly.



"Whom?"



"Father. I was walking in the street, out there at the corner, about

ten o'clock and he seemed to be walking in front. It looked just like

him. I wanted to go to Katerina Ivanovna. . . ."



"You were walking in the streets?"



"Yes," Sonia whispered abruptly, again overcome with confusion and

looking down.



"Katerina Ivanovna used to beat you, I dare say?"



"Oh no, what are you saying? No!" Sonia looked at him almost with

dismay.



"You love her, then?"



"Love her? Of course!" said Sonia with plaintive emphasis, and she

clasped her hands in distress. "Ah, you don't. . . . If you only knew!

You see, she is quite like a child. . . . Her mind is quite unhinged,

you see . . . from sorrow. And how clever she used to be . . . how

generous . . . how kind! Ah, you don't understand, you don't

understand!"



Sonia said this as though in despair, wringing her hands in excitement

and distress. Her pale cheeks flushed, there was a look of anguish in

her eyes. It was clear that she was stirred to the very depths, that

she was longing to speak, to champion, to express something. A sort of

/insatiable/ compassion, if one may so express it, was reflected in

every feature of her face.



"Beat me! how can you? Good heavens, beat me! And if she did beat me,

what then? What of it? You know nothing, nothing about it. . . . She

is so unhappy . . . ah, how unhappy! And ill. . . . She is seeking

righteousness, she is pure. She has such faith that there must be

righteousness everywhere and she expects it. . . . And if you were to

torture her, she wouldn't do wrong. She doesn't see that it's

impossible for people to be righteous and she is angry at it. Like a

child, like a child. She is good!"



"And what will happen to you?"



Sonia looked at him inquiringly.



"They are left on your hands, you see. They were all on your hands

before, though. . . . And your father came to you to beg for drink.

Well, how will it be now?"



"I don't know," Sonia articulated mournfully.



"Will they stay there?"



"I don't know. . . . They are in debt for the lodging, but the

landlady, I hear, said to-day that she wanted to get rid of them, and

Katerina Ivanovna says that she won't stay another minute."



"How is it she is so bold? She relies upon you?"



"Oh, no, don't talk like that. . . . We are one, we live like one."

Sonia was agitated again and even angry, as though a canary or some

other little bird were to be angry. "And what could she do? What, what

could she do?" she persisted, getting hot and excited. "And how she

cried to-day! Her mind is unhinged, haven't you noticed it? At one

minute she is worrying like a child that everything should be right

to-morrow, the lunch and all that. . . . Then she is wringing her

hands, spitting blood, weeping, and all at once she will begin

knocking her head against the wall, in despair. Then she will be

comforted again. She builds all her hopes on you; she says that you

will help her now and that she will borrow a little money somewhere

and go to her native town with me and set up a boarding school for the

daughters of gentlemen and take me to superintend it, and we will

begin a new splendid life. And she kisses and hugs me, comforts me,

and you know she has such faith, such faith in her fancies! One can't

contradict her. And all the day long she has been washing, cleaning,

mending. She dragged the wash tub into the room with her feeble hands

and sank on the bed, gasping for breath. We went this morning to the

shops to buy shoes for Polenka and Lida for theirs are quite worn out.

Only the money we'd reckoned wasn't enough, not nearly enough. And she

picked out such dear little boots, for she has taste, you don't know.

And there in the shop she burst out crying before the shopmen because

she hadn't enough. . . . Ah, it was sad to see her. . . ."



"Well, after that I can understand your living like this," Raskolnikov

said with a bitter smile.



"And aren't you sorry for them? Aren't you sorry?" Sonia flew at him

again. "Why, I know, you gave your last penny yourself, though you'd

seen nothing of it, and if you'd seen everything, oh dear! And how

often, how often I've brought her to tears! Only last week! Yes, I!

Only a week before his death. I was cruel! And how often I've done it!

Ah, I've been wretched at the thought of it all day!"



Sonia wrung her hands as she spoke at the pain of remembering it.



"You were cruel?"



"Yes, I--I. I went to see them," she went on, weeping, "and father

said, 'read me something, Sonia, my head aches, read to me, here's a

book.' He had a book he had got from Andrey Semyonovitch

Lebeziatnikov, he lives there, he always used to get hold of such

funny books. And I said, 'I can't stay,' as I didn't want to read, and

I'd gone in chiefly to show Katerina Ivanovna some collars. Lizaveta,

the pedlar, sold me some collars and cuffs cheap, pretty, new,

embroidered ones. Katerina Ivanovna liked them very much; she put them

on and looked at herself in the glass and was delighted with them.

'Make me a present of them, Sonia,' she said, 'please do.' '/Please

do/,' she said, she wanted them so much. And when could she wear them?

They just reminded her of her old happy days. She looked at herself in

the glass, admired herself, and she has no clothes at all, no things

of her own, hasn't had all these years! And she never asks anyone for

anything; she is proud, she'd sooner give away everything. And these

she asked for, she liked them so much. And I was sorry to give them.

'What use are they to you, Katerina Ivanovna?' I said. I spoke like

that to her, I ought not to have said that! She gave me such a look.

And she was so grieved, so grieved at my refusing her. And it was so

sad to see. . . . And she was not grieved for the collars, but for my

refusing, I saw that. Ah, if only I could bring it all back, change

it, take back those words! Ah, if I . . . but it's nothing to you!"



"Did you know Lizaveta, the pedlar?"



"Yes. . . . Did you know her?" Sonia asked with some surprise.



"Katerina Ivanovna is in consumption, rapid consumption; she will soon

die," said Raskolnikov after a pause, without answering her question.



"Oh, no, no, no!"



And Sonia unconsciously clutched both his hands, as though imploring

that she should not.



"But it will be better if she does die."



"No, not better, not at all better!" Sonia unconsciously repeated in

dismay.



"And the children? What can you do except take them to live with you?"



"Oh, I don't know," cried Sonia, almost in despair, and she put her

hands to her head.



It was evident that that idea had very often occurred to her before

and he had only roused it again.



"And, what, if even now, while Katerina Ivanovna is alive, you get ill

and are taken to the hospital, what will happen then?" he persisted

pitilessly.



"How can you? That cannot be!"



And Sonia's face worked with awful terror.



"Cannot be?" Raskolnikov went on with a harsh smile. "You are not

insured against it, are you? What will happen to them then? They will

be in the street, all of them, she will cough and beg and knock her

head against some wall, as she did to-day, and the children will cry.

. . . Then she will fall down, be taken to the police station and to

the hospital, she will die, and the children . . ."



"Oh, no. . . . God will not let it be!" broke at last from Sonia's

overburdened bosom.



She listened, looking imploringly at him, clasping her hands in dumb

entreaty, as though it all depended upon him.



Raskolnikov got up and began to walk about the room. A minute passed.

Sonia was standing with her hands and her head hanging in terrible

dejection.



"And can't you save? Put by for a rainy day?" he asked, stopping

suddenly before her.



"No," whispered Sonia.



"Of course not. Have you tried?" he added almost ironically.



"Yes."



"And it didn't come off! Of course not! No need to ask."



And again he paced the room. Another minute passed.



"You don't get money every day?"



Sonia was more confused than ever and colour rushed into her face

again.



"No," she whispered with a painful effort.



"It will be the same with Polenka, no doubt," he said suddenly.



"No, no! It can't be, no!" Sonia cried aloud in desperation, as though

she had been stabbed. "God would not allow anything so awful!"



"He lets others come to it."



"No, no! God will protect her, God!" she repeated beside herself.



"But, perhaps, there is no God at all," Raskolnikov answered with a

sort of malignance, laughed and looked at her.



Sonia's face suddenly changed; a tremor passed over it. She looked at

him with unutterable reproach, tried to say something, but could not

speak and broke into bitter, bitter sobs, hiding her face in her

hands.



"You say Katerina Ivanovna's mind is unhinged; your own mind is

unhinged," he said after a brief silence.



Five minutes passed. He still paced up and down the room in silence,

not looking at her. At last he went up to her; his eyes glittered. He

put his two hands on her shoulders and looked straight into her

tearful face. His eyes were hard, feverish and piercing, his lips were

twitching. All at once he bent down quickly and dropping to the

ground, kissed her foot. Sonia drew back from him as from a madman.

And certainly he looked like a madman.



"What are you doing to me?" she muttered, turning pale, and a sudden

anguish clutched at her heart.



He stood up at once.



"I did not bow down to you, I bowed down to all the suffering of

humanity," he said wildly and walked away to the window. "Listen," he

added, turning to her a minute later. "I said just now to an insolent

man that he was not worth your little finger . . . and that I did my

sister honour making her sit beside you."



"Ach, you said that to them! And in her presence?" cried Sonia,

frightened. "Sit down with me! An honour! Why, I'm . . .

dishonourable. . . . Ah, why did you say that?"



"It was not because of your dishonour and your sin I said that of you,

but because of your great suffering. But you are a great sinner,

that's true," he added almost solemnly, "and your worst sin is that

you have destroyed and betrayed yourself /for nothing/. Isn't that

fearful? Isn't it fearful that you are living in this filth which you

loathe so, and at the same time you know yourself (you've only to open

your eyes) that you are not helping anyone by it, not saving anyone

from anything? Tell me," he went on almost in a frenzy, "how this

shame and degradation can exist in you side by side with other,

opposite, holy feelings? It would be better, a thousand times better

and wiser to leap into the water and end it all!"



"But what would become of them?" Sonia asked faintly, gazing at him

with eyes of anguish, but not seeming surprised at his suggestion.



Raskolnikov looked strangely at her. He read it all in her face; so

she must have had that thought already, perhaps many times, and

earnestly she had thought out in her despair how to end it and so

earnestly, that now she scarcely wondered at his suggestion. She had

not even noticed the cruelty of his words. (The significance of his

reproaches and his peculiar attitude to her shame she had, of course,

not noticed either, and that, too, was clear to him.) But he saw how

monstrously the thought of her disgraceful, shameful position was

torturing her and had long tortured her. "What, what," he thought,

"could hitherto have hindered her from putting an end to it?" Only

then he realised what those poor little orphan children and that

pitiful half-crazy Katerina Ivanovna, knocking her head against the

wall in her consumption, meant for Sonia.



But, nevertheless, it was clear to him again that with her character

and the amount of education she had after all received, she could not

in any case remain so. He was still confronted by the question, how

could she have remained so long in that position without going out of

her mind, since she could not bring herself to jump into the water? Of

course he knew that Sonia's position was an exceptional case, though

unhappily not unique and not infrequent, indeed; but that very

exceptionalness, her tinge of education, her previous life might, one

would have thought, have killed her at the first step on that

revolting path. What held her up--surely not depravity? All that

infamy had obviously only touched her mechanically, not one drop of

real depravity had penetrated to her heart; he saw that. He saw

through her as she stood before him. . . .



"There are three ways before her," he thought, "the canal, the

madhouse, or . . . at last to sink into depravity which obscures the

mind and turns the heart to stone."



The last idea was the most revolting, but he was a sceptic, he was

young, abstract, and therefore cruel, and so he could not help

believing that the last end was the most likely.



"But can that be true?" he cried to himself. "Can that creature who

has still preserved the purity of her spirit be consciously drawn at

last into that sink of filth and iniquity? Can the process already

have begun? Can it be that she has only been able to bear it till now,

because vice has begun to be less loathsome to her? No, no, that

cannot be!" he cried, as Sonia had just before. "No, what has kept her

from the canal till now is the idea of sin and they, the children.

. . . And if she has not gone out of her mind . . . but who says she

has not gone out of her mind? Is she in her senses? Can one talk, can

one reason as she does? How can she sit on the edge of the abyss of

loathsomeness into which she is slipping and refuse to listen when she

is told of danger? Does she expect a miracle? No doubt she does.

Doesn't that all mean madness?"



He stayed obstinately at that thought. He liked that explanation

indeed better than any other. He began looking more intently at her.



"So you pray to God a great deal, Sonia?" he asked her.



Sonia did not speak; he stood beside her waiting for an answer.



"What should I be without God?" she whispered rapidly, forcibly,

glancing at him with suddenly flashing eyes, and squeezing his hand.



"Ah, so that is it!" he thought.



"And what does God do for you?" he asked, probing her further.



Sonia was silent a long while, as though she could not answer. Her

weak chest kept heaving with emotion.



"Be silent! Don't ask! You don't deserve!" she cried suddenly, looking

sternly and wrathfully at him.



"That's it, that's it," he repeated to himself.



"He does everything," she whispered quickly, looking down again.



"That's the way out! That's the explanation," he decided, scrutinising

her with eager curiosity, with a new, strange, almost morbid feeling.

He gazed at that pale, thin, irregular, angular little face, those

soft blue eyes, which could flash with such fire, such stern energy,

that little body still shaking with indignation and anger--and it all

seemed to him more and more strange, almost impossible. "She is a

religious maniac!" he repeated to himself.



There was a book lying on the chest of drawers. He had noticed it

every time he paced up and down the room. Now he took it up and looked

at it. It was the New Testament in the Russian translation. It was

bound in leather, old and worn.



"Where did you get that?" he called to her across the room.



She was still standing in the same place, three steps from the table.



"It was brought me," she answered, as it were unwillingly, not looking

at him.



"Who brought it?"



"Lizaveta, I asked her for it."



"Lizaveta! strange!" he thought.



Everything about Sonia seemed to him stranger and more wonderful every

moment. He carried the book to the candle and began to turn over the

pages.



"Where is the story of Lazarus?" he asked suddenly.



Sonia looked obstinately at the ground and would not answer. She was

standing sideways to the table.



"Where is the raising of Lazarus? Find it for me, Sonia."



She stole a glance at him.



"You are not looking in the right place. . . . It's in the fourth

gospel," she whispered sternly, without looking at him.



"Find it and read it to me," he said. He sat down with his elbow on

the table, leaned his head on his hand and looked away sullenly,

prepared to listen.



"In three weeks' time they'll welcome me in the madhouse! I shall be

there if I am not in a worse place," he muttered to himself.



Sonia heard Raskolnikov's request distrustfully and moved hesitatingly

to the table. She took the book however.



"Haven't you read it?" she asked, looking up at him across the table.



Her voice became sterner and sterner.



"Long ago. . . . When I was at school. Read!"



"And haven't you heard it in church?"



"I . . . haven't been. Do you often go?"



"N-no," whispered Sonia.



Raskolnikov smiled.



"I understand. . . . And you won't go to your father's funeral

to-morrow?"



"Yes, I shall. I was at church last week, too . . . I had a requiem

service."



"For whom?"



"For Lizaveta. She was killed with an axe."



His nerves were more and more strained. His head began to go round.



"Were you friends with Lizaveta?"



"Yes. . . . She was good . . . she used to come . . . not often . . .

she couldn't. . . . We used to read together and . . . talk. She will

see God."



The last phrase sounded strange in his ears. And here was something

new again: the mysterious meetings with Lizaveta and both of them--

religious maniacs.



"I shall be a religious maniac myself soon! It's infectious!"



"Read!" he cried irritably and insistently.



Sonia still hesitated. Her heart was throbbing. She hardly dared to

read to him. He looked almost with exasperation at the "unhappy

lunatic."



"What for? You don't believe? . . ." she whispered softly and as it

were breathlessly.



"Read! I want you to," he persisted. "You used to read to Lizaveta."



Sonia opened the book and found the place. Her hands were shaking, her

voice failed her. Twice she tried to begin and could not bring out the

first syllable.



"Now a certain man was sick named Lazarus of Bethany . . ." she forced

herself at last to read, but at the third word her voice broke like an

overstrained string. There was a catch in her breath.



Raskolnikov saw in part why Sonia could not bring herself to read to

him and the more he saw this, the more roughly and irritably he

insisted on her doing so. He understood only too well how painful it

was for her to betray and unveil all that was her /own/. He understood

that these feelings really were her /secret treasure/, which she had

kept perhaps for years, perhaps from childhood, while she lived with

an unhappy father and a distracted stepmother crazed by grief, in

the midst of starving children and unseemly abuse and reproaches.

But at the same time he knew now and knew for certain that, although

it filled her with dread and suffering, yet she had a tormenting

desire to read and to read to /him/ that he might hear it, and to read

/now/ whatever might come of it! . . . He read this in her eyes, he

could see it in her intense emotion. She mastered herself, controlled

the spasm in her throat and went on reading the eleventh chapter of

St. John. She went on to the nineteenth verse:



"And many of the Jews came to Martha and Mary to comfort them

concerning their brother.



"Then Martha as soon as she heard that Jesus was coming went and met

Him: but Mary sat still in the house.



"Then said Martha unto Jesus, Lord, if Thou hadst been here, my

brother had not died.



"But I know that even now whatsoever Thou wilt ask of God, God will

give it Thee. . . ."



Then she stopped again with a shamefaced feeling that her voice would

quiver and break again.



"Jesus said unto her, thy brother shall rise again.



"Martha saith unto Him, I know that he shall rise again in the

resurrection, at the last day.



"Jesus said unto her, I am the resurrection and the life: he that

believeth in Me though he were dead, yet shall he live.



"And whosoever liveth and believeth in Me shall never die. Believest

thou this?



"She saith unto Him,"



(And drawing a painful breath, Sonia read distinctly and forcibly as

though she were making a public confession of faith.)



"Yea, Lord: I believe that Thou art the Christ, the Son of God Which

should come into the world."



She stopped and looked up quickly at him, but controlling herself went

on reading. Raskolnikov sat without moving, his elbows on the table

and his eyes turned away. She read to the thirty-second verse.



"Then when Mary was come where Jesus was and saw Him, she fell down at

His feet, saying unto Him, Lord if Thou hadst been here, my brother

had not died.



"When Jesus therefore saw her weeping, and the Jews also weeping which

came with her, He groaned in the spirit and was troubled,



"And said, Where have ye laid him? They said unto Him, Lord, come and

see.



"Jesus wept.



"Then said the Jews, behold how He loved him!



"And some of them said, could not this Man which opened the eyes of

the blind, have caused that even this man should not have died?"



Raskolnikov turned and looked at her with emotion. Yes, he had known

it! She was trembling in a real physical fever. He had expected it.

She was getting near the story of the greatest miracle and a feeling

of immense triumph came over her. Her voice rang out like a bell;

triumph and joy gave it power. The lines danced before her eyes, but

she knew what she was reading by heart. At the last verse "Could not

this Man which opened the eyes of the blind . . ." dropping her voice

she passionately reproduced the doubt, the reproach and censure of the

blind disbelieving Jews, who in another moment would fall at His feet

as though struck by thunder, sobbing and believing. . . . "And /he,

he/--too, is blinded and unbelieving, he, too, will hear, he, too,

will believe, yes, yes! At once, now," was what she was dreaming, and

she was quivering with happy anticipation.



"Jesus therefore again groaning in Himself cometh to the grave. It was

a cave, and a stone lay upon it.



"Jesus said, Take ye away the stone. Martha, the sister of him that

was dead, saith unto Him, Lord by this time he stinketh: for he hath

been dead four days."



She laid emphasis on the word /four/.



"Jesus saith unto her, Said I not unto thee that if thou wouldest

believe, thou shouldest see the glory of God?



"Then they took away the stone from the place where the dead was laid.

And Jesus lifted up His eyes and said, Father, I thank Thee that Thou

hast heard Me.



"And I knew that Thou hearest Me always; but because of the people

which stand by I said it, that they may believe that Thou hast sent

Me.



"And when He thus had spoken, He cried with a loud voice, Lazarus,

come forth.



"And he that was dead came forth."



(She read loudly, cold and trembling with ecstasy, as though she were

seeing it before her eyes.)



"Bound hand and foot with graveclothes; and his face was bound about

with a napkin. Jesus saith unto them, Loose him and let him go.



"Then many of the Jews which came to Mary and had seen the things

which Jesus did believed on Him."



She could read no more, closed the book and got up from her chair

quickly.



"That is all about the raising of Lazarus," she whispered severely and

abruptly, and turning away she stood motionless, not daring to raise

her eyes to him. She still trembled feverishly. The candle-end was

flickering out in the battered candlestick, dimly lighting up in the

poverty-stricken room the murderer and the harlot who had so strangely

been reading together the eternal book. Five minutes or more passed.



"I came to speak of something," Raskolnikov said aloud, frowning. He

got up and went to Sonia. She lifted her eyes to him in silence. His

face was particularly stern and there was a sort of savage

determination in it.



"I have abandoned my family to-day," he said, "my mother and sister. I

am not going to see them. I've broken with them completely."



"What for?" asked Sonia amazed. Her recent meeting with his mother and

sister had left a great impression which she could not analyse. She

heard his news almost with horror.



"I have only you now," he added. "Let us go together. . . . I've come

to you, we are both accursed, let us go our way together!"



His eyes glittered "as though he were mad," Sonia thought, in her

turn.



"Go where?" she asked in alarm and she involuntarily stepped back.



"How do I know? I only know it's the same road, I know that and

nothing more. It's the same goal!"



She looked at him and understood nothing. She knew only that he was

terribly, infinitely unhappy.



"No one of them will understand, if you tell them, but I have

understood. I need you, that is why I have come to you."



"I don't understand," whispered Sonia.



"You'll understand later. Haven't you done the same? You, too, have

transgressed . . . have had the strength to transgress. You have laid

hands on yourself, you have destroyed a life . . . /your own/ (it's

all the same!). You might have lived in spirit and understanding, but

you'll end in the Hay Market. . . . But you won't be able to stand it,

and if you remain alone you'll go out of your mind like me. You are

like a mad creature already. So we must go together on the same road!

Let us go!"



"What for? What's all this for?" said Sonia, strangely and violently

agitated by his words.



"What for? Because you can't remain like this, that's why! You must

look things straight in the face at last, and not weep like a child

and cry that God won't allow it. What will happen, if you should

really be taken to the hospital to-morrow? She is mad and in

consumption, she'll soon die and the children? Do you mean to tell me

Polenka won't come to grief? Haven't you seen children here at the

street corners sent out by their mothers to beg? I've found out where

those mothers live and in what surroundings. Children can't remain

children there! At seven the child is vicious and a thief. Yet

children, you know, are the image of Christ: 'theirs is the kingdom of

Heaven.' He bade us honour and love them, they are the humanity of the

future. . . ."



"What's to be done, what's to be done?" repeated Sonia, weeping

hysterically and wringing her hands.



"What's to be done? Break what must be broken, once for all, that's

all, and take the suffering on oneself. What, you don't understand?

You'll understand later. . . . Freedom and power, and above all,

power! Over all tremblrters. But I am living outside for the time, I

had to have some repairs done here. It's almost finished now. . . .

Government quarters, you know, are a capital thing. Eh, what do you

think?"



"Yes, a capital thing," answered Raskolnikov, looking at him almost

ironically.



"A capital thing, a capital thing," repeated Porfiry Petrovitch, as

though he had just thought of something quite different. "Yes, a

capital thing," he almost shouted at last, suddenly staring at

Raskolnikov and stopping short two steps from him.



This stupid repetition was too incongruous in its ineptitude with the

serious, brooding and enigmatic glance he turned upon his visitor.



But this stirred Raskolnikov's spleen more than ever and he could not

resist an ironical and rather incautious challenge.



"Tell me, please," he asked suddenly, looking almost insolently at him

and taking a kind of pleasure in his own insolence. "I believe it's a

sort of legal rule, a sort of legal tradition--for all investigating

lawyers--to begin their attack from afar, with a trivial, or at least

an irrelevant subject, so as to encourage, or rather, to divert the

man they are cross-examining, to disarm his caution and then all at

once to give him an unexpected knock-down blow with some fatal

question. Isn't that so? It's a sacred tradition, mentioned, I fancy,

in all the manuals of the art?"



"Yes, yes. . . . Why, do you imagine that was why I spoke about

government quarters . . . eh?"



And as he said this Porfiry Petrovitch screwed up his eyes and winked;

a good-humoured, crafty look passed over his face. The wrinkles on his

forehead were smoothed out, his eyes contracted, his features

broadened and he suddenly went off into a nervous prolonged laugh,

shaking all over and looking Raskolnikov straight in the face. The

latter forced himself to laugh, too, but when Porfiry, seeing that he

was laughing, broke into such a guffaw that he turned almost crimson,

Raskolnikov's repulsion overcame all precaution; he left off laughing,

scowled and stared with hatred at Porfiry, keeping his eyes fixed on

him while his intentionally prolonged laughter lasted. There was lack

of precaution on both sides, however, for Porfiry Petrovitch seemed to

be laughing in his visitor's face and to be very little disturbed at

the annoyance with which the visitor received it. The latter fact was

very significant in Raskolnikov's eyes: he saw that Porfiry Petrovitch

had not been embarrassed just before either, but that he, Raskolnikov,

had perhaps fallen into a trap; that there must be something, some

motive here unknown to him; that, perhaps, everything was in readiness

and in another moment would break upon him . . .



He went straight to the point at once, rose from his seat and took his

cap.



"Porfiry Petrovitch," he began resolutely, though with considerable

irritation, "yesterday you expressed a desire that I should come to

you for some inquiries" (he laid special stress on the word

"inquiries"). "I have come and if you have anything to ask me, ask it,

and if not, allow me to withdraw. I have no time to spare. . . . I

have to be at the funeral of that man who was run over, of whom you

. . . know also," he added, feeling angry at once at having made this

addition and more irritated at his anger. "I am sick of it all, do you

hear? and have long been. It's partly what made me ill. In short," he

shouted, feeling that the phrase about his illness was still more out

of place, "in short, kindly examine me or let me go, at once. And if

you must examine me, do so in the proper form! I will not allow you to

do so otherwise, and so meanwhile, good-bye, as we have evidently

nothing to keep us now."



"Good heavens! What do you mean? What shall I question you about?"

cackled Porfiry Petrovitch with a change of tone, instantly leaving

off laughing. "Please don't disturb yourself," he began fidgeting from

place to place and fussily making Raskolnikov sit down. "There's no

hurry, there's no hurry, it's all nonsense. Oh, no, I'm very glad

you've come to see me at last . . . I look upon you simply as a

visitor. And as for my confounded laughter, please excuse it, Rodion

Romanovitch. Rodion Romanovitch? That is your name? . . . It's my

nerves, you tickled me so with your witty observation; I assure you,

sometimes I shake with laughter like an india-rubber ball for half an

hour at a time. . . . I'm often afraid of an attack of paralysis. Do

sit down. Please do, or I shall think you are angry . . ."



Raskolnikov did not speak; he listened, watching him, still frowning

angrily. He did sit down, but still held his cap.



"I must tell you one thing about myself, my dear Rodion Romanovitch,"

Porfiry Petrovitch continued, moving about the room and again avoiding

his visitor's eyes. "You see, I'm a bachelor, a man of no consequence

and not used to society; besides, I have nothing before me, I'm set,

I'm running to seed and . . . and have you noticed, Rodion

Romanovitch, that in our Petersburg circles, if two clever men meet

who are not intimate, but respect each other, like you and me, it

takes them half an hour before they can find a subject for

conversation--they are dumb, they sit opposite each other and feel

awkward. Everyone has subjects of conversation, ladies for instance

. . . people in high society always have their subjects of

conversation, /c'est de rigueur/, but people of the middle sort like

us, thinking people that is, are always tongue-tied and awkward. What

is the reason of it? Whether it is the lack of public interest, or

whether it is we are so honest we don't want to deceive one another, I

don't know. What do you think? Do put down your cap, it looks as if

you were just going, it makes me uncomfortable . . . I am so

delighted . . ."



Raskolnikov put down his cap and continued listening in silence with a

serious frowning face to the vague and empty chatter of Porfiry

Petrovitch. "Does he really want to distract my attention with his

silly babble?"



"I can't offer you coffee here; but why not spend five minutes with a

friend?" Porfiry pattered on, "and you know all these official duties

. . . please don't mind my running up and down, excuse it, my dear

fellow, I am very much afraid of offending you, but exercise is

absolutely indispensable for me. I'm always sitting and so glad to be

moving about for five minutes . . . I suffer from my sedentary life

. . . I always intend to join a gymnasium; they say that officials of

all ranks, even Privy Councillors, may be seen skipping gaily there;

there you have it, modern science . . . yes, yes. . . . But as for my

duties here, inquiries and all such formalities . . . you mentioned

inquiries yourself just now . . . I assure you these interrogations

are sometimes more embarrassing for the interrogator than for the

interrogated. . . . You made the observation yourself just now very

aptly and wittily." (Raskolnikov had made no observation of the kind.)

"One gets into a muddle! A regular muddle! One keeps harping on the

same note, like a drum! There is to be a reform and we shall be called

by a different name, at least, he-he-he! And as for our legal

tradition, as you so wittily called it, I thoroughly agree with you.

Every prisoner on trial, even the rudest peasant, knows that they

begin by disarming him with irrelevant questions (as you so happily

put it) and then deal him a knock-down blow, he-he-he!--your

felicitous comparison, he-he! So you really imagined that I meant by

'government quarters' . . . he-he! You are an ironical person. Come. I

won't go on! Ah, by the way, yes! One word leads to another. You spoke

of formality just now, apropos of the inquiry, you know. But what's

the use of formality? In many cases it's nonsense. Sometimes one has a

friendly chat and gets a good deal more out of it. One can always fall

back on formality, allow me to assure you. And after all, what does it

amount to? An examining lawyer cannot be bounded by formality at every

step. The work of investigation is, so to speak, a free art in its own

way, he-he-he!"



Porfiry Petrovitch took breath a moment. He had simply babbled on

uttering empty phrases, letting slip a few enigmatic words and again

reverting to incoherence. He was almost running about the room, moving

his fat little legs quicker and quicker, looking at the ground, with

his right hand behind his back, while with his left making

gesticulations that were extraordinarily incongruous with his words.

Raskolnikov suddenly noticed that as he ran about the room he seemed

twice to stop for a moment near the door, as though he were listening.



"Is he expecting anything?"



"You are certainly quite right about it," Porfiry began gaily, looking

with extraordinary simplicity at Raskolnikov (which startled him and

instantly put him on his guard); "certainly quite right in laughing so

wittily at our legal forms, he-he! Some of these elaborate

psychological methods are exceedingly ridiculous and perhaps useless,

if one adheres too closely to the forms. Yes . . . I am talking of

forms again. Well, if I recognise, or more strictly speaking, if I

suspect someone or other to be a criminal in any case entrusted to me

. . . you're reading for the law, of course, Rodion Romanovitch?"



"Yes, I was . . ."



"Well, then it is a precedent for you for the future--though don't

suppose I should venture to instruct you after the articles you

publish about crime! No, I simply make bold to state it by way of

fact, if I took this man or that for a criminal, why, I ask, should I

worry him prematurely, even though I had evidence against him? In one

case I may be bound, for instance, to arrest a man at once, but

another may be in quite a different position, you know, so why

shouldn't I let him walk about the town a bit? he-he-he! But I see you

don't quite understand, so I'll give you a clearer example. If I put

him in prison too soon, I may very likely give him, so to speak, moral

support, he-he! You're laughing?"



Raskolnikov had no idea of laughing. He was sitting with compressed

lips, his feverish eyes fixed on Porfiry Petrovitch's.



"Yet that is the case, with some types especially, for men are so

different. You say 'evidence'. Well, there may be evidence. But

evidence, you know, can generally be taken two ways. I am an examining

lawyer and a weak man, I confess it. I should like to make a proof, so

to say, mathematically clear. I should like to make a chain of

evidence such as twice two are four, it ought to be a direct,

irrefutable proof! And if I shut him up too soon--even though I might

be convinced /he/ was the man, I should very likely be depriving

myself of the means of getting further evidence against him. And how?

By giving him, so to speak, a definite position, I shall put him out

of suspense and set his mind at rest, so that he will retreat into his

shell. They say that at Sevastopol, soon after Alma, the clever people

were in a terrible fright that the enemy would attack openly and take

Sevastopol at once. But when they saw that the enemy preferred a

regular siege, they were delighted, I am told and reassured, for the

thing would drag on for two months at least. You're laughing, you

don't believe me again? Of course, you're right, too. You're right,

you're right. These are special cases, I admit. But you must observe

this, my dear Rodion Romanovitch, the general case, the case for which

all legal forms and rules are intended, for which they are calculated

and laid down in books, does not exist at all, for the reason that

every case, every crime, for instance, so soon as it actually occurs,

at once becomes a thoroughly special case and sometimes a case unlike

any that's gone before. Very comic cases of that sort sometimes occur.

If I leave one man quite alone, if I don't touch him and don't worry

him, but let him know or at least suspect every moment that I know all

about it and am watching him day and night, and if he is in continual

suspicion and terror, he'll be bound to lose his head. He'll come of

himself, or maybe do something which will make it as plain as twice

two are four--it's delightful. It may be so with a simple peasant, but

with one of our sort, an intelligent man cultivated on a certain side,

it's a dead certainty. For, my dear fellow, it's a very important

matter to know on what side a man is cultivated. And then there are

nerves, there are nerves, you have overlooked them! Why, they are all

sick, nervous and irritable! . . . And then how they all suffer from

spleen! That I assure you is a regular gold-mine for us. And it's no

anxiety to me, his running about the town free! Let him, let him walk

about for a bit! I know well enough that I've caught him and that he

won't escape me. Where could he escape to, he-he? Abroad, perhaps? A

Pole will escape abroad, but not here, especially as I am watching and

have taken measures. Will he escape into the depths of the country

perhaps? But you know, peasants live there, real rude Russian

peasants. A modern cultivated man would prefer prison to living with

such strangers as our peasants. He-he! But that's all nonsense, and on

the surface. It's not merely that he has nowhere to run to, he is

/psychologically/ unable to escape me, he-he! What an expression!

Through a law of nature he can't escape me if he had anywhere to go.

Have you seen a butterfly round a candle? That's how he will keep

circling and circling round me. Freedom will lose its attractions.

He'll begin to brood, he'll weave a tangle round himself, he'll worry

himself to death! What's more he will provide me with a mathematical

proof--if I only give him long enough interval. . . . And he'll keep

circling round me, getting nearer and nearer and then--flop! He'll fly

straight into my mouth and I'll swallow him, and that will be very

amusing, he-he-he! You don't believe me?"



Raskolnikov made no reply; he sat pale and motionless, still gazing

with the same intensity into Porfiry's face.



"It's a lesson," he thought, turning cold. "This is beyond the cat

playing with a mouse, like yesterday. He can't be showing off his

power with no motive . . . prompting me; he is far too clever for that

. . . he must have another object. What is it? It's all nonsense, my

friend, you are pretending, to scare me! You've no proofs and the man

I saw had no real existence. You simply want to make me lose my head,

to work me up beforehand and so to crush me. But you are wrong, you

won't do it! But why give me such a hint? Is he reckoning on my

shattered nerves? No, my friend, you are wrong, you won't do it even

though you have some trap for me . . . let us see what you have in

store for me."



And he braced himself to face a terrible and unknown ordeal. At times

he longed to fall on Porfiry and strangle him. This anger was what he

dreaded from the beginning. He felt that his parched lips were flecked

with foam, his heart was throbbing. But he was still determined not to

speak till the right moment. He realised that this was the best policy

in his position, because instead of saying too much he would be

irritating his enemy by his silence and provoking him into speaking

too freely. Anyhow, this was what he hoped for.



"No, I see you don't believe me, you think I am playing a harmless

joke on you," Porfiry began again, getting more and more lively,

chuckling at every instant and again pacing round the room. "And to be

sure you're right: God has given me a figure that can awaken none but

comic ideas in other people; a buffoon; but let me tell you, and I

repeat it, excuse an old man, my dear Rodion Romanovitch, you are a

man still young, so to say, in your first youth and so you put

intellect above everything, like all young people. Playful wit and

abstract arguments fascinate you and that's for all the world like the

old Austrian /Hof-kriegsrath/, as far as I can judge of military

matters, that is: on paper they'd beaten Napoleon and taken him

prisoner, and there in their study they worked it all out in the

cleverest fashion, but look you, General Mack surrendered with all his

army, he-he-he! I see, I see, Rodion Romanovitch, you are laughing at

a civilian like me, taking examples out of military history! But I

can't help it, it's my weakness. I am fond of military science. And

I'm ever so fond of reading all military histories. I've certainly

missed my proper career. I ought to have been in the army, upon my

word I ought. I shouldn't have been a Napoleon, but I might have been

a major, he-he! Well, I'll tell you the whole truth, my dear fellow,

about this /special case/, I mean: actual fact and a man's

temperament, my dear sir, are weighty matters and it's astonishing how

they sometimes deceive the sharpest calculation! I--listen to an old

man--am speaking seriously, Rodion Romanovitch" (as he said this

Porfiry Petrovitch, who was scarcely five-and-thirty, actually seemed

to have grown old; even his voice changed and he seemed to shrink

together) "Moreover, I'm a candid man . . . am I a candid man or not?

What do you say? I fancy I really am: I tell you these things for

nothing and don't even expect a reward for it, he-he! Well, to

proceed, wit in my opinion is a splendid thing, it is, so to say, an

adornment of nature and a consolation of life, and what tricks it can

play! So that it sometimes is hard for a poor examining lawyer to know

where he is, especially when he's liable to be carried away by his own

fancy, too, for you know he is a man after all! But the poor fellow is

saved by the criminal's temperament, worse luck for him! But young

people carried away by their own wit don't think of that 'when they

overstep all obstacles,' as you wittily and cleverly expressed it

yesterday. He will lie--that is, the man who is a /special case/, the

incognito, and he will lie well, in the cleverest fashion; you might

think he would triumph and enjoy the fruits of his wit, but at the

most interesting, the most flagrant moment he will faint. Of course

there may be illness and a stuffy room as well, but anyway! Anyway

he's given us the idea! He lied incomparably, but he didn't reckon on

his temperament. That's what betrays him! Another time he will be

carried away by his playful wit into making fun of the man who

suspects him, he will turn pale as it were on purpose to mislead, but

his paleness will be /too natural/, too much like the real thing,

again he has given us an idea! Though his questioner may be deceived

at first, he will think differently next day if he is not a fool, and,

of course, it is like that at every step! He puts himself forward

where he is not wanted, speaks continually when he ought to keep

silent, brings in all sorts of allegorical allusions, he-he! Comes and

asks why didn't you take me long ago? he-he-he! And that can happen,

you know, with the cleverest man, the psychologist, the literary man.

The temperament reflects everything like a mirror! Gaze into it and

admire what you see! But why are you so pale, Rodion Romanovitch? Is

the room stuffy? Shall I open the window?"



"Oh, don't trouble, please," cried Raskolnikov and he suddenly broke

into a laugh. "Please don't trouble."



Porfiry stood facing him, paused a moment and suddenly he too laughed.

Raskolnikov got up from the sofa, abruptly checking his hysterical

laughter.



"Porfiry Petrovitch," he began, speaking loudly and distinctly, though

his legs trembled and he could scarcely stand. "I see clearly at last

that you actually suspect me of murdering that old woman and her

sister Lizaveta. Let me tell you for my part that I am sick of this.

If you find that you have a right to prosecute me legally, to arrest

me, then prosecute me, arrest me. But I will not let myself be jeered

at to my face and worried . . ."



His lips trembled, his eyes glowed with fury and he could not restrain

his voice.



"I won't allow it!" he shouted, bringing his fist down on the table.

"Do you hear that, Porfiry Petrovitch? I won't allow it."



"Good heavens! What does it mean?" cried Porfiry Petrovitch,

apparently quite frightened. "Rodion Romanovitch, my dear fellow, what

is the matter with you?"



"I won't allow it," Raskolnikov shouted again.



"Hush, my dear man! They'll hear and come in. Just think, what could

we say to them?" Porfiry Petrovitch whispered in horror, bringing his

face close to Raskolnikov's.



"I won't allow it, I won't allow it," Raskolnikov repeated

mechanically, but he too spoke in a sudden whisper.



Porfiry turned quickly and ran to open the window.



"Some fresh air! And you must have some water, my dear fellow. You're

ill!" and he was running to the door to call for some when he found a

decanter of water in the corner. "Come, drink a little," he whispered,

rushing up to him with the decanter. "It will be sure to do you good."



Porfiry Petrovitch's alarm and sympathy were so natural that

Raskolnikov was silent and began looking at him with wild curiosity.

He did not take the water, however.



"Rodion Romanovitch, my dear fellow, you'll drive yourself out of your

mind, I assure you, ach, ach! Have some water, do drink a little."



He forced him to take the glass. Raskolnikov raised it mechanically to

his lips, but set it on the table again with disgust.



"Yes, you've had a little attack! You'll bring back your illness

again, my dear fellow," Porfiry Petrovitch cackled with friendly

sympathy, though he still looked rather disconcerted. "Good heavens,

you must take more care of yourself! Dmitri Prokofitch was here, came

to see me yesterday--I know, I know, I've a nasty, ironical temper,

but what they made of it! . . . Good heavens, he came yesterday after

you'd been. We dined and he talked and talked away, and I could only

throw up my hands in despair! Did he come from you? But do sit down,

for mercy's sake, sit down!"



"No, not from me, but I knew he went to you and why he went,"

Raskolnikov answered sharply.



"You knew?"



"I knew. What of it?"



"Why this, Rodion Romanovitch, that I know more than that about you; I

know about everything. I know how you went /to take a flat/ at night

when it was dark and how you rang the bell and asked about the blood,

so that the workmen and the porter did not know what to make of it.

Yes, I understand your state of mind at that time . . . but you'll

drive yourself mad like that, upon my word! You'll lose your head!

You're full of generous indignation at the wrongs you've received,

first from destiny, and then from the police officers, and so you rush

from one thing to another to force them to speak out and make an end

of it all, because you are sick of all this suspicion and foolishness.

That's so, isn't it? I have guessed how you feel, haven't I? Only in

that way you'll lose your head and Razumihin's, too; he's too /good/ a

man for such a position, you must know that. You are ill and he is

good and your illness is infectious for him . . . I'll tell you about

it when you are more yourself. . . . But do sit down, for goodness'

sake. Please rest, you look shocking, do sit down."



Raskolnikov sat down; he no longer shivered, he was hot all over. In

amazement he listened with strained attention to Porfiry Petrovitch

who still seemed frightened as he looked after him with friendly

solicitude. But he did not believe a word he said, though he felt a

strange inclination to believe. Porfiry's unexpected words about the

flat had utterly overwhelmed him. "How can it be, he knows about the

flat then," he thought suddenly, "and he tells it me himself!"



"Yes, in our legal practice there was a case almost exactly similar, a

case of morbid psychology," Porfiry went on quickly. "A man confessed

to murder and how he kept it up! It was a regular hallucination; he

brought forward facts, he imposed upon everyone and why? He had been

partly, but only partly, unintentionally the cause of a murder and

when he knew that he had given the murderers the opportunity, he sank

into dejection, it got on his mind and turned his brain, he began

imagining things and he persuaded himself that he was the murderer.

But at last the High Court of Appeal went into it and the poor fellow

was acquitted and put under proper care. Thanks to the Court of

Appeal! Tut-tut-tut! Why, my dear fellow, you may drive yourself into

delirium if you have the impulse to work upon your nerves, to go

ringing bells at night and asking about blood! I've studied all this

morbid psychology in my practice. A man is sometimes tempted to jump

out of a window or from a belfry. Just the same with bell-ringing.

. . . It's all illness, Rodion Romanovitch! You have begun to neglect

your illness. You should consult an experienced doctor, what's the

good of that fat fellow? You are lightheaded! You were delirious when

you did all this!"



For a moment Raskolnikov felt everything going round.



"Is it possible, is it possible," flashed through his mind, "that he

is still lying? He can't be, he can't be." He rejected that idea,

feeling to what a degree of fury it might drive him, feeling that that

fury might drive him mad.



"I was not delirious. I knew what I was doing," he cried, straining

every faculty to penetrate Porfiry's game, "I was quite myself, do you

hear?"



"Yes, I hear and understand. You said yesterday you were not

delirious, you were particularly emphatic about it! I understand all

you can tell me! A-ach! . . . Listen, Rodion Romanovitch, my dear

fellow. If you were actually a criminal, or were somehow mixed up in

this damnable business, would you insist that you were not delirious

but in full possession of your faculties? And so emphatically and

persistently? Would it be possible? Quite impossible, to my thinking.

If you had anything on your conscience, you certainly ought to insist

that you were delirious. That's so, isn't it?"



There was a note of slyness in this inquiry. Raskolnikov drew back on

the sofa as Porfiry bent over him and stared in silent perplexity at

him.



"Another thing about Razumihin--you certainly ought to have said that

he came of his own accord, to have concealed your part in it! But you

don't conceal it! You lay stress on his coming at your instigation."



Raskolnikov had not done so. A chill went down his back.



"You keep telling lies," he said slowly and weakly, twisting his lips

into a sickly smile, "you are trying again to show that you know all

my game, that you know all I shall say beforehand," he said, conscious

himself that he was not weighing his words as he ought. "You want to

frighten me . . . or you are simply laughing at me . . ."



He still stared at him as he said this and again there was a light of

intense hatred in his eyes.



"You keep lying," he said. "You know perfectly well that the best

policy for the criminal is to tell the truth as nearly as possible

. . . to conceal as little as possible. I don't believe you!"



"What a wily person you are!" Porfiry tittered, "there's no catching

you; you've a perfect monomania. So you don't believe me? But still

you do believe me, you believe a quarter; I'll soon make you believe

the whole, because I have a sincere liking for you and genuinely wish

you good."



Raskolnikov's lips trembled.



"Yes, I do," went on Porfiry, touching Raskolnikov's arm genially,

"you must take care of your illness. Besides, your mother and sister

are here now; you must think of them. You must soothe and comfort them

and you do nothing but frighten them . . ."



"What has that to do with you? How do you know it? What concern is it

of yours? You are keeping watch on me and want to let me know it?"



"Good heavens! Why, I learnt it all from you yourself! You don't

notice that in your excitement you tell me and others everything. From

Razumihin, too, I learnt a number of interesting details yesterday.

No, you interrupted me, but I must tell you that, for all your wit,

your suspiciousness makes you lose the common-sense view of things. To

return to bell-ringing, for instance. I, an examining lawyer, have

betrayed a precious thing like that, a real fact (for it is a fact

worth having), and you see nothing in it! Why, if I had the slightest

suspicion of you, should I have acted like that? No, I should first

have disarmed your suspicions and not let you see I knew of that fact,

should have diverted your attention and suddenly have dealt you a

knock-down blow (your expression) saying: 'And what were you doing,

sir, pray, at ten or nearly eleven at the murdered woman's flat and

why did you ring the bell and why did you ask about blood? And why did

you invite the porters to go with you to the police station, to the

lieutenant?' That's how I ought to have acted if I had a grain of

suspicion of you. I ought to have taken your evidence in due form,

searched your lodging and perhaps have arrested you, too . . . so I

have no suspicion of you, since I have not done that! But you can't

look at it normally and you see nothing, I say again."



Raskolnikov started so that Porfiry Petrovitch could not fail to

perceive it.



"You are lying all the while," he cried, "I don't know your object,

but you are lying. You did not speak like that just now and I cannot

be mistaken!"



"I am lying?" Porfiry repeated, apparently incensed, but preserving a

good-humoured and ironical face, as though he were not in the least

concerned at Raskolnikov's opinion of him. "I am lying . . . but how

did I treat you just now, I, the examining lawyer? Prompting you and

giving you every means for your defence; illness, I said, delirium,

injury, melancholy and the police officers and all the rest of it? Ah!

He-he-he! Though, indeed, all those psychological means of defence are

not very reliable and cut both ways: illness, delirium, I don't

remember--that's all right, but why, my good sir, in your illness and

in your delirium were you haunted by just those delusions and not by

any others? There may have been others, eh? He-he-he!"



Raskolnikov looked haughtily and contemptuously at him.



"Briefly," he said loudly and imperiously, rising to his feet and in

so doing pushing Porfiry back a little, "briefly, I want to know, do

you acknowledge me perfectly free from suspicion or not? Tell me,

Porfiry Petrovitch, tell me once for all and make haste!"



"What a business I'm having with you!" cried Porfiry with a perfectly

good-humoured, sly and composed face. "And why do you want to know,

why do you want to know so much, since they haven't begun to worry

you? Why, you are like a child asking for matches! And why are you so

uneasy? Why do you force yourself upon us, eh? He-he-he!"



"I repeat," Raskolnikov cried furiously, "that I can't put up with

it!"



"With what? Uncertainty?" interrupted Porfiry.



"Don't jeer at me! I won't have it! I tell you I won't have it. I

can't and I won't, do you hear, do you hear?" he shouted, bringing his

fist down on the table again.



"Hush! Hush! They'll overhear! I warn you seriously, take care of

yourself. I am not joking," Porfiry whispered, but this time there was

not the look of old womanish good nature and alarm in his face. Now he

was peremptory, stern, frowning and for once laying aside all

mystification.



But this was only for an instant. Raskolnikov, bewildered, suddenly

fell into actual frenzy, but, strange to say, he again obeyed the

command to speak quietly, though he was in a perfect paroxysm of fury.



"I will not allow myself to be tortured," he whispered, instantly

recognising with hatred that he could not help obeying the command and

driven to even greater fury by the thought. "Arrest me, search me, but

kindly act in due form and don't play with me! Don't dare!"



"Don't worry about the form," Porfiry interrupted with the same sly

smile, as it were, gloating with enjoyment over Raskolnikov. "I

invited you to see me quite in a friendly way."



"I don't want your friendship and I spit on it! Do you hear? And,

here, I take my cap and go. What will you say now if you mean to

arrest me?"



He took up his cap and went to the door.



"And won't you see my little surprise?" chuckled Porfiry, again taking

him by the arm and stopping him at the door.



He seemed to become more playful and good-humoured which maddened

Raskolnikov.



"What surprise?" he asked, standing still and looking at Porfiry in

alarm.



"My little surprise, it's sitting there behind the door, he-he-he!"

(He pointed to the locked door.) "I locked him in that he should not

escape."



"What is it? Where? What? . . ."



Raskolnikov walked to the door and would have opened it, but it was

locked.



"It's locked, here is the key!"



And he brought a key out of his pocket.



"You are lying," roared Raskolnikov without restraint, "you lie, you

damned punchinello!" and he rushed at Porfiry who retreated to the

other door, not at all alarmed.



"I understand it all! You are lying and mocking so that I may betray

myself to you . . ."



"Why, you could not betray yourself any further, my dear Rodion

Romanovitch. You are in a passion. Don't shout, I shall call the

clerks."



"You are lying! Call the clerks! You knew I was ill and tried to work

me into a frenzy to make me betray myself, that was your object!

Produce your facts! I understand it all. You've no evidence, you have

only wretched rubbishly suspicions like Zametov's! You knew my

character, you wanted to drive me to fury and then to knock me down

with priests and deputies. . . . Are you waiting for them? eh! What

are you waiting for? Where are they? Produce them?"



"Why deputies, my good man? What things people will imagine! And to do

so would not be acting in form as you say, you don't know the

business, my dear fellow. . . . And there's no escaping form, as you

see," Porfiry muttered, listening at the door through which a noise

could be heard.



"Ah, they're coming," cried Raskolnikov. "You've sent for them! You

expected them! Well, produce them all: your deputies, your witnesses,

what you like! . . . I am ready!"



But at this moment a strange incident occurred, something so

unexpected that neither Raskolnikov nor Porfiry Petrovitch could have

looked for such a conclusion to their interview.







CHAPTER VI



When he remembered the scene afterwards, this is how Raskolnikov saw

it.



The noise behind the door increased, and suddenly the door was opened

a little.



"What is it?" cried Porfiry Petrovitch, annoyed. "Why, I gave

orders . . ."



For an instant there was no answer, but it was evident that there were

several persons at the door, and that they were apparently pushing

somebody back.



"What is it?" Porfiry Petrovitch repeated, uneasily.



"The prisoner Nikolay has been brought," someone answered.



"He is not wanted! Take him away! Let him wait! What's he doing here?

How irregular!" cried Porfiry, rushing to the door.



"But he . . ." began the same voice, and suddenly ceased.



Two seconds, not more, were spent in actual struggle, then someone

gave a violent shove, and then a man, very pale, strode into the room.



This man's appearance was at first sight very strange. He stared

straight before him, as though seeing nothing. There was a determined

gleam in his eyes; at the same time there was a deathly pallor in his

face, as though he were being led to the scaffold. His white lips were

faintly twitching.



He was dressed like a workman and was of medium height, very young,

slim, his hair cut in round crop, with thin spare features. The man

whom he had thrust back followed him into the room and succeeded in

seizing him by the shoulder; he was a warder; but Nikolay pulled his

arm away.



Several persons crowded inquisitively into the doorway. Some of them

tried to get in. All this took place almost instantaneously.



"Go away, it's too soon! Wait till you are sent for! . . . Why have

you brought him so soon?" Porfiry Petrovitch muttered, extremely

annoyed, and as it were thrown out of his reckoning.



But Nikolay suddenly knelt down.



"What's the matter?" cried Porfiry, surprised.



"I am guilty! Mine is the sin! I am the murderer," Nikolay articulated

suddenly, rather breathless, but speaking fairly loudly.



For ten seconds there was silence as though all had been struck dumb;

even the warder stepped back, mechanically retreated to the door, and

stood immovable.



"What is it?" cried Porfiry Petrovitch, recovering from his momentary

stupefaction.



"I . . . am the murderer," repeated Nikolay, after a brief pause.



"What . . . you . . . what . . . whom did you kill?" Porfiry

Petrovitch was obviously bewildered.



Nikolay again was silent for a moment.



"Alyona Ivanovna and her sister Lizaveta Ivanovna, I . . . killed

. . . with an axe. Darkness came over me," he added suddenly, and was

again silent.



He still remained on his knees. Porfiry Petrovitch stood for some

moments as though meditating, but suddenly roused himself and waved

back the uninvited spectators. They instantly vanished and closed the

door. Then he looked towards Raskolnikov, who was standing in the

corner, staring wildly at Nikolay and moved towards him, but stopped

short, looked from Nikolay to Raskolnikov and then again at Nikolay,

and seeming unable to restrain himself darted at the latter.



"You're in too great a hurry," he shouted at him, almost angrily. "I

didn't ask you what came over you. . . . Speak, did you kill them?"



"I am the murderer. . . . I want to give evidence," Nikolay

pronounced.



"Ach! What did you kill them with?"



"An axe. I had it ready."



"Ach, he is in a hurry! Alone?"



Nikolay did not understand the question.



"Did you do it alone?"



"Yes, alone. And Mitka is not guilty and had no share in it."



"Don't be in a hurry about Mitka! A-ach! How was it you ran downstairs

like that at the time? The porters met you both!"



"It was to put them off the scent . . . I ran after Mitka," Nikolay

replied hurriedly, as though he had prepared the answer.



"I knew it!" cried Porfiry, with vexation. "It's not his own tale he

is telling," he muttered as though to himself, and suddenly his eyes

rested on Raskolnikov again.



He was apparently so taken up with Nikolay that for a moment he had

forgotten Raskolnikov. He was a little taken aback.



"My dear Rodion Romanovitch, excuse me!" he flew up to him, "this

won't do; I'm afraid you must go . . . it's no good your staying . . .

I will . . .  you see, what a surprise! . . . Good-bye!"



And taking him by the arm, he showed him to the door.



"I suppose you didn't expect it?" said Raskolnikov who, though he had

not yet fully grasped the situation, had regained his courage.



"You did not expect it either, my friend. See how your hand is

trembling! He-he!"



"You're trembling, too, Porfiry Petrovitch!"



"Yes, I am; I didn't expect it."



They were already at the door; Porfiry was impatient for Raskolnikov

to be gone.



"And your little surprise, aren't you going to show it to me?"

Raskolnikov said, sarcastically.



"Why, his teeth are chattering as he asks, he-he! You are an ironical

person! Come, till we meet!"



"I believe we can say /good-bye/!"



"That's in God's hands," muttered Porfiry, with an unnatural smile.



As he walked through the office, Raskolnikov noticed that many people

were looking at him. Among them he saw the two porters from /the/

house, whom he had invited that night to the police station. They

stood there waiting. But he was no sooner on the stairs than he heard

the voice of Porfiry Petrovitch behind him. Turning round, he saw the

latter running after him, out of breath.



"One word, Rodion Romanovitch; as to all the rest, it's in God's

hands, but as a matter of form there are some questions I shall have

to ask you . . . so we shall meet again, shan't we?"



And Porfiry stood still, facing him with a smile.



"Shan't we?" he added again.



He seemed to want to say something more, but could not speak out.



"You must forgive me, Porfiry Petrovitch, for what has just passed

. . . I lost my temper," began Raskolnikov, who had so far regained

his courage that he felt irresistibly inclined to display his

coolness.



"Don't mention it, don't mention it," Porfiry replied, almost

gleefully. "I myself, too . . . I have a wicked temper, I admit it!

But we shall meet again. If it's God's will, we may see a great deal

of one another."



"And will get to know each other through and through?" added

Raskolnikov.



"Yes; know each other through and through," assented Porfiry

Petrovitch, and he screwed up his eyes, looking earnestly at

Raskolnikov. "Now you're going to a birthday party?"



"To a funeral."



"Of course, the funeral! Take care of yourself, and get well."



"I don't know what to wish you," said Raskolnikov, who had begun to

descend the stairs, but looked back again. "I should like to wish you

success, but your office is such a comical one."



"Why comical?" Porfiry Petrovitch had turned to go, but he seemed to

prick up his ears at this.



"Why, how you must have been torturing and harassing that poor Nikolay

psychologically, after your fashion, till he confessed! You must have

been at him day and night, proving to him that he was the murderer,

and now that he has confessed, you'll begin vivisecting him again.

'You are lying,' you'll say. 'You are not the murderer! You can't be!

It's not your own tale you are telling!' You must admit it's a comical

business!"



"He-he-he! You noticed then that I said to Nikolay just now that it

was not his own tale he was telling?"



"How could I help noticing it!"



"He-he! You are quick-witted. You notice everything! You've really a

playful mind! And you always fasten on the comic side . . . he-he!

They say that was the marked characteristic of Gogol, among the

writers."



"Yes, of Gogol."



"Yes, of Gogol. . . . I shall look forward to meeting you."



"So shall I."



Raskolnikov walked straight home. He was so muddled and bewildered

that on getting home he sat for a quarter of an hour on the sofa,

trying to collect his thoughts. He did not attempt to think about

Nikolay; he was stupefied; he felt that his confession was something

inexplicable, amazing--something beyond his understanding. But

Nikolay's confession was an actual fact. The consequences of this fact

were clear to him at once, its falsehood could not fail to be

discovered, and then they would be after him again. Till then, at

least, he was free and must do something for himself, for the danger

was imminent.



But how imminent? His position gradually became clear to him.

Remembering, sketchily, the main outlines of his recent scene with

Porfiry, he could not help shuddering again with horror. Of course, he

did not yet know all Porfiry's aims, he could not see into all his

calculations. But he had already partly shown his hand, and no one

knew better than Raskolnikov how terrible Porfiry's "lead" had been

for him. A little more and he /might/ have given himself away

completely, circumstantially. Knowing his nervous temperament and from

the first glance seeing through him, Porfiry, though playing a bold

game, was bound to win. There's no denying that Raskolnikov had

compromised himself seriously, but no /facts/ had come to light as

yet; there was nothing positive. But was he taking a true view of the

position? Wasn't he mistaken? What had Porfiry been trying to get at?

Had he really some surprise prepared for him? And what was it? Had he

really been expecting something or not? How would they have parted if

it had not been for the unexpected appearance of Nikolay?



Porfiry had shown almost all his cards--of course, he had risked

something in showing them--and if he had really had anything up his

sleeve (Raskolnikov reflected), he would have shown that, too. What

was that "surprise"? Was it a joke? Had it meant anything? Could it

have concealed anything like a fact, a piece of positive evidence? His

yesterday's visitor? What had become of him? Where was he to-day? If

Porfiry really had any evidence, it must be connected with him. . . .



He sat on the sofa with his elbows on his knees and his face hidden in

his hands. He was still shivering nervously. At last he got up, took

his cap, thought a minute, and went to the door.



He had a sort of presentiment that for to-day, at least, he might

consider himself out of danger. He had a sudden sense almost of joy;

he wanted to make haste to Katerina Ivanovna's. He would be too late

for the funeral, of course, but he would be in time for the memorial

dinner, and there at once he would see Sonia.



He stood still, thought a moment, and a suffering smile came for a

moment on to his lips.



"To-day! To-day," he repeated to himself. "Yes, to-day! So it must

be. . . ."



But as he was about to open the door, it began opening of itself. He

started and moved back. The door opened gently and slowly, and there

suddenly appeared a figure--yesterday's visitor /from underground/.



The man stood in the doorway, looked at Raskolnikov without speaking,

and took a step forward into the room. He was exactly the same as

yesterday; the same figure, the same dress, but there was a great

change in his face; he looked dejected and sighed deeply. If he had

only put his hand up to his cheek and leaned his head on one side he

would have looked exactly like a peasant woman.



"What do you want?" asked Raskolnikov, numb with terror. The man was

still silent, but suddenly he bowed down almost to the ground,

touching it with his finger.



"What is it?" cried Raskolnikov.



"I have sinned," the man articulated softly.



"How?"



"By evil thoughts."



They looked at one another.



"I was vexed. When you came, perhaps in drink, and bade the porters go

to the police station and asked about the blood, I was vexed that they

let you go and took you for drunken. I was so vexed that I lost my

sleep. And remembering the address we came here yesterday and asked

for you. . . ."



"Who came?" Raskolnikov interrupted, instantly beginning to recollect.



"I did, I've wronged you."



"Then you come from that house?"



"I was standing at the gate with them . . . don't you remember? We

have carried on our trade in that house for years past. We cure and

prepare hides, we take work home . . . most of all I was vexed. . . ."



And the whole scene of the day before yesterday in the gateway came

clearly before Raskolnikov's mind; he recollected that there had been

several people there besides the porters, women among them. He

remembered one voice had suggested taking him straight to the police-

station. He could not recall the face of the speaker, and even now he

did not recognise it, but he remembered that he had turned round and

made him some answer. . . .



So this was the solution of yesterday's horror. The most awful thought

was that he had been actually almost lost, had almost done for himself

on account of such a /trivial/ circumstance. So this man could tell

nothing except his asking about the flat and the blood stains. So

Porfiry, too, had nothing but that /delirium/, no facts but this

/psychology/ which /cuts both ways/, nothing positive. So if no more

facts come to light (and they must not, they must not!) then . . .

then what can they do to him? How can they convict him, even if they

arrest him? And Porfiry then had only just heard about the flat and

had not known about it before.



"Was it you who told Porfiry . . . that I'd been there?" he cried,

struck by a sudden idea.



"What Porfiry?"



"The head of the detective department?"



"Yes. The porters did not go there, but I went."



"To-day?"



"I got there two minutes before you. And I heard, I heard it all, how

he worried you."



"Where? What? When?"



"Why, in the next room. I was sitting there all the time."



"What? Why, then you were the surprise? But how could it happen? Upon

my word!"



"I saw that the porters did not want to do what I said," began the

man; "for it's too late, said they, and maybe he'll be angry that we

did not come at the time. I was vexed and I lost my sleep, and I began

making inquiries. And finding out yesterday where to go, I went

to-day. The first time I went he wasn't there, when I came an hour

later he couldn't see me. I went the third time, and they showed me

in. I informed him of everything, just as it happened, and he began

skipping about the room and punching himself on the chest. 'What do

you scoundrels mean by it? If I'd known about it I should have

arrested him!' Then he ran out, called somebody and began talking to

him in the corner, then he turned to me, scolding and questioning me.

He scolded me a great deal; and I told him everything, and I told him

that you didn't dare to say a word in answer to me yesterday and that

you didn't recognise me. And he fell to running about again and kept

hitting himself on the chest, and getting angry and running about, and

when you were announced he told me to go into the next room. 'Sit

there a bit,' he said. 'Don't move, whatever you may hear.' And he set

a chair there for me and locked me in. 'Perhaps,' he said, 'I may call

you.' And when Nikolay'd been brought he let me out as soon as you

were gone. 'I shall send for you again and question you,' he said."



"And did he question Nikolay while you were there?"



"He got rid of me as he did of you, before he spoke to Nikolay."



The man stood still, and again suddenly bowed down, touching the

ground with his finger.



"Forgive me for my evil thoughts, and my slander."



"May God forgive you," answered Raskolnikov.



And as he said this, the man bowed down again, but not to the ground,

turned slowly and went out of the room.



"It all cuts both ways, now it all cuts both ways," repeated

Raskolnikov, and he went out more confident than ever.



"Now we'll make a fight for it," he said, with a malicious smile, as

he went down the stairs. His malice was aimed at himself; with shame

and contempt he recollected his "cowardice."









PART V







CHAPTER I



The morning that followed the fateful interview with Dounia and her

mother brought sobering influences to bear on Pyotr Petrovitch.

Intensely unpleasant as it was, he was forced little by little to

accept as a fact beyond recall what had seemed to him only the day

before fantastic and incredible. The black snake of wounded vanity had

been gnawing at his heart all night. When he got out of bed, Pyotr

Petrovitch immediately looked in the looking-glass. He was afraid that

he had jaundice. However his health seemed unimpaired so far, and

looking at his noble, clear-skinned countenance which had grown

fattish of late, Pyotr Petrovitch for an instant was positively

comforted in the conviction that he would find another bride and,

perhaps, even a better one. But coming back to the sense of his

present position, he turned aside and spat vigorously, which excited a

sarcastic smile in Andrey Semyonovitch Lebeziatnikov, the young friend

with whom he was staying. That smile Pyotr Petrovitch noticed, and at

once set it down against his young friend's account. He had set down a

good many points against him of late. His anger was redoubled when he

reflected that he ought not to have told Andrey Semyonovitch about the

result of yesterday's interview. That was the second mistake he had

made in temper, through impulsiveness and irritability. . . .

Moreover, all that morning one unpleasantness followed another. He

even found a hitch awaiting him in his legal case in the senate. He

was particularly irritated by the owner of the flat which had been

taken in view of his approaching marriage and was being redecorated at

his own expense; the owner, a rich German tradesman, would not

entertain the idea of breaking the contract which had just been signed

and insisted on the full forfeit money, though Pyotr Petrovitch would

be giving him back the flat practically redecorated. In the same way

the upholsterers refused to return a single rouble of the instalment

paid for the furniture purchased but not yet removed to the flat.



"Am I to get married simply for the sake of the furniture?" Pyotr

Petrovitch ground his teeth and at the same time once more he had a

gleam of desperate hope. "Can all that be really so irrevocably over?

Is it no use to make another effort?" The thought of Dounia sent a

voluptuous pang through his heart. He endured anguish at that moment,

and if it had been possible to slay Raskolnikov instantly by wishing

it, Pyotr Petrovitch would promptly have uttered the wish.



"It was my mistake, too, not to have given them money," he thought, as

he returned dejectedly to Lebeziatnikov's room, "and why on earth was

I such a Jew? It was false economy! I meant to keep them without a

penny so that they should turn to me as their providence, and look at

them! foo! If I'd spent some fifteen hundred roubles on them for the

trousseau and presents, on knick-knacks, dressing-cases, jewellery,

materials, and all that sort of trash from Knopp's and the English

shop, my position would have been better and . . . stronger! They

could not have refused me so easily! They are the sort of people that

would feel bound to return money and presents if they broke it off;

and they would find it hard to do it! And their conscience would prick

them: how can we dismiss a man who has hitherto been so generous and

delicate?. . . . H'm! I've made a blunder."



And grinding his teeth again, Pyotr Petrovitch called himself a fool--

but not aloud, of course.



He returned home, twice as irritated and angry as before. The

preparations for the funeral dinner at Katerina Ivanovna's excited his

curiosity as he passed. He had heard about it the day before; he

fancied, indeed, that he had been invited, but absorbed in his own

cares he had paid no attention. Inquiring of Madame Lippevechsel who

was busy laying the table while Katerina Ivanovna was away at the

cemetery, he heard that the entertainment was to be a great affair,

that all the lodgers had been invited, among them some who had not

known the dead man, that even Andrey Semyonovitch Lebeziatnikov was

invited in spite of his previous quarrel with Katerina Ivanovna, that

he, Pyotr Petrovitch, was not only invited, but was eagerly expected

as he was the most important of the lodgers. Amalia Ivanovna herself

had been invited with great ceremony in spite of the recent

unpleasantness, and so she was very busy with preparations and was

taking a positive pleasure in them; she was moreover dressed up to the

nines, all in new black silk, and she was proud of it. All this

suggested an idea to Pyotr Petrovitch and he went into his room, or

rather Lebeziatnikov's, somewhat thoughtful. He had learnt that

Raskolnikov was to be one of the guests.



Andrey Semyonovitch had been at home all the morning. The attitude of

Pyotr Petrovitch to this gentleman was strange, though perhaps

natural. Pyotr Petrovitch had despised and hated him from the day he

came to stay with him and at the same time he seemed somewhat afraid

of him. He had not come to stay with him on his arrival in Petersburg

simply from parsimony, though that had been perhaps his chief object.

He had heard of Andrey Semyonovitch, who had once been his ward, as a

leading young progressive who was taking an important part in certain

interesting circles, the doings of which were a legend in the

provinces. It had impressed Pyotr Petrovitch. These powerful

omniscient circles who despised everyone and showed everyone up had

long inspired in him a peculiar but quite vague alarm. He had not, of

course, been able to form even an approximate notion of what they

meant. He, like everyone, had heard that there were, especially in

Petersburg, progressives of some sort, nihilists and so on, and, like

many people, he exaggerated and distorted the significance of those

words to an absurd degree. What for many years past he had feared more

than anything was /being shown up/ and this was the chief ground for

his continual uneasiness at the thought of transferring his business

to Petersburg. He was afraid of this as little children are sometimes

panic-stricken. Some years before, when he was just entering on his

own career, he had come upon two cases in which rather important

personages in the province, patrons of his, had been cruelly shown up.

One instance had ended in great scandal for the person attacked and

the other had very nearly ended in serious trouble. For this reason

Pyotr Petrovitch intended to go into the subject as soon as he reached

Petersburg and, if necessary, to anticipate contingencies by seeking

the favour of "our younger generation." He relied on Andrey

Semyonovitch for this aestion" had already been a subject of dispute between

them. What was absurd was that it made Lebeziatnikov really angry,

while it amused Luzhin and at that moment he particularly wanted to

anger his young friend.



"It's your ill-luck yesterday that makes you so ill-humoured and

annoying," blurted out Lebeziatnikov, who in spite of his

"independence" and his "protests" did not venture to oppose Pyotr

Petrovitch and still behaved to him with some of the respect habitual

in earlier years.



"You'd better tell me this," Pyotr Petrovitch interrupted with haughty

displeasure, "can you . . . or rather are you really friendly enough

with that young person to ask her to step in here for a minute? I

think they've all come back from the cemetery . . . I heard the sound

of steps . . . I want to see her, that young person."



"What for?" Lebeziatnikov asked with surprise.



"Oh, I want to. I am leaving here to-day or to-morrow and therefore I

wanted to speak to her about . . . However, you may be present during

the interview. It's better you should be, indeed. For there's no

knowing what you might imagine."



"I shan't imagine anything. I only asked and, if you've anything to

say to her, nothing is easier than to call her in. I'll go directly

and you may be sure I won't be in your way."



Five minutes later Lebeziatnikov came in with Sonia. She came in very

much surprised and overcome with shyness as usual. She was always shy

in such circumstances and was always afraid of new people, she had

been as a child and was even more so now. . . . Pyotr Petrovitch met

her "politely and affably," but with a certain shade of bantering

familiarity which in his opinion was suitable for a man of his

respectability and weight in dealing with a creature so young and so

/interesting/ as she. He hastened to "reassure" her and made her sit

down facing him at the table. Sonia sat down, looked about her--at

Lebeziatnikov, at the notes lying on the table and then again at Pyotr

Petrovitch and her eyes remained riveted on him. Lebeziatnikov was

moving to the door. Pyotr Petrovitch signed to Sonia to remain seated

and stopped Lebeziatnikov.



"Is Raskolnikov in there? Has he come?" he asked him in a whisper.



"Raskolnikov? Yes. Why? Yes, he is there. I saw him just come in.

. . . Why?"



"Well, I particularly beg you to remain here with us and not to leave

me alone with this . . . young woman. I only want a few words with

her, but God knows what they may make of it. I shouldn't like

Raskolnikov to repeat anything. . . . You understand what I mean?"



"I understand!" Lebeziatnikov saw the point. "Yes, you are right.

. . . Of course, I am convinced personally that you have no reason to

be uneasy, but . . . still, you are right. Certainly I'll stay. I'll

stand here at the window and not be in your way . . .  I think you are

right . . ."



Pyotr Petrovitch returned to the sofa, sat down opposite Sonia, looked

attentively at her and assumed an extremely dignified, even severe

expression, as much as to say, "don't you make any mistake, madam."

Sonia was overwhelmed with embarrassment.



"In the first place, Sofya Semyonovna, will you make my excuses to

your respected mamma. . . . That's right, isn't it? Katerina Ivanovna

stands in the place of a mother to you?" Pyotr Petrovitch began with

great dignity, though affably.



It was evident that his intentions were friendly.



"Quite so, yes; the place of a mother," Sonia answered, timidly and

hurriedly.



"Then will you make my apologies to her? Through inevitable

circumstances I am forced to be absent and shall not be at the dinner

in spite of your mamma's kind invitation."



"Yes . . . I'll tell her . . . at once."



And Sonia hastily jumped up from her seat.



"Wait, that's not all," Pyotr Petrovitch detained her, smiling at her

simplicity and ignorance of good manners, "and you know me little, my

dear Sofya Semyonovna, if you suppose I would have ventured to trouble

a person like you for a matter of so little consequence affecting

myself only. I have another object."



Sonia sat down hurriedly. Her eyes rested again for an instant on the

grey-and-rainbow-coloured notes that remained on the table, but she

quickly looked away and fixed her eyes on Pyotr Petrovitch. She felt

it horribly indecorous, especially for /her/, to look at another

person's money. She stared at the gold eye-glass which Pyotr

Petrovitch held in his left hand and at the massive and extremely

handsome ring with a yellow stone on his middle finger. But suddenly

she looked away and, not knowing where to turn, ended by staring Pyotr

Petrovitch again straight in the face. After a pause of still greater

dignity he continued.



"I chanced yesterday in passing to exchange a couple of words with

Katerina Ivanovna, poor woman. That was sufficient to enable me to

ascertain that she is in a position--preternatural, if one may so

express it."



"Yes . . . preternatural . . ." Sonia hurriedly assented.



"Or it would be simpler and more comprehensible to say, ill."



"Yes, simpler and more comprehen . . . yes, ill."



"Quite so. So then from a feeling of humanity and so to speak

compassion, I should be glad to be of service to her in any way,

foreseeing her unfortunate position. I believe the whole of this

poverty-stricken family depends now entirely on you?"



"Allow me to ask," Sonia rose to her feet, "did you say something to

her yesterday of the possibility of a pension? Because she told me you

had undertaken to get her one. Was that true?"



"Not in the slightest, and indeed it's an absurdity! I merely hinted

at her obtaining temporary assistance as the widow of an official who

had died in the service--if only she has patronage . . . but

apparently your late parent had not served his full term and had not

indeed been in the service at all of late. In fact, if there could be

any hope, it would be very ephemeral, because there would be no claim

for assistance in that case, far from it. . . . And she is dreaming of

a pension already, he-he-he! . . . A go-ahead lady!"



"Yes, she is. For she is credulous and good-hearted, and she believes

everything from the goodness of her heart and . . . and . . . and she

is like that . . . yes . . . You must excuse her," said Sonia, and

again she got up to go.



"But you haven't heard what I have to say."



"No, I haven't heard," muttered Sonia.



"Then sit down." She was terribly confused; she sat down again a third

time.



"Seeing her position with her unfortunate little ones, I should be

glad, as I have said before, so far as lies in my power, to be of

service, that is, so far as is in my power, not more. One might for

instance get up a subscription for her, or a lottery, something of the

sort, such as is always arranged in such cases by friends or even

outsiders desirous of assisting people. It was of that I intended to

speak to you; it might be done."



"Yes, yes . . . God will repay you for it," faltered Sonia, gazing

intently at Pyotr Petrovitch.



"It might be, but we will talk of it later. We might begin it to-day,

we will talk it over this evening and lay the foundation so to speak.

Come to me at seven o'clock. Mr. Lebeziatnikov, I hope, will assist

us. But there is one circumstance of which I ought to warn you

beforehand and for which I venture to trouble you, Sofya Semyonovna,

to come here. In my opinion money cannot be, indeed it's unsafe to put

it into Katerina Ivanovna's own hands. The dinner to-day is a proof of

that. Though she has not, so to speak, a crust of bread for to-morrow

and . . . well, boots or shoes, or anything; she has bought to-day

Jamaica rum, and even, I believe, Madeira and . . . and coffee. I saw

it as I passed through. To-morrow it will all fall upon you again,

they won't have a crust of bread. It's absurd, really, and so, to my

thinking, a subscription ought to be raised so that the unhappy widow

should not know of the money, but only you, for instance. Am I right?"



"I don't know . . . this is only to-day, once in her life. . . . She

was so anxious to do honour, to celebrate the memory. . . . And she is

very sensible . . . but just as you think and I shall be very, very

. . . they will all be . . . and God will reward . . . and the

orphans . . ."



Sonia burst into tears.



"Very well, then, keep it in mind; and now will you accept for the

benefit of your relation the small sum that I am able to spare, from

me personally. I am very anxious that my name should not be mentioned

in connection with it. Here . . . having so to speak anxieties of my

own, I cannot do more . . ."



And Pyotr Petrovitch held out to Sonia a ten-rouble note carefully

unfolded. Sonia took it, flushed crimson, jumped up, muttered

something and began taking leave. Pyotr Petrovitch accompanied her

ceremoniously to the door. She got out of the room at last, agitated

and distressed, and returned to Katerina Ivanovna, overwhelmed with

confusion.



All this time Lebeziatnikov had stood at the window or walked about

the room, anxious not to interrupt the conversation; when Sonia had

gone he walked up to Pyotr Petrovitch and solemnly held out his hand.



"I heard and /saw/ everything," he said, laying stress on the last

verb. "That is honourable, I mean to say, it's humane! You wanted to

avoid gratitude, I saw! And although I cannot, I confess, in principle

sympathise with private charity, for it not only fails to eradicate

the evil but even promotes it, yet I must admit that I saw your action

with pleasure--yes, yes, I like it."



"That's all nonsense," muttered Pyotr Petrovitch, somewhat

disconcerted, looking carefully at Lebeziatnikov.



"No, it's not nonsense! A man who has suffered distress and annoyance

as you did yesterday and who yet can sympathise with the misery of

others, such a man . . . even though he is making a social mistake--is

still deserving of respect! I did not expect it indeed of you, Pyotr

Petrovitch, especially as according to your ideas . . . oh, what a

drawback your ideas are to you! How distressed you are for instance by

your ill-luck yesterday," cried the simple-hearted Lebeziatnikov, who

felt a return of affection for Pyotr Petrovitch. "And, what do you

want with marriage, with /legal/ marriage, my dear, noble Pyotr

Petrovitch? Why do you cling to this /legality/ of marriage? Well, you

may beat me if you like, but I am glad, positively glad it hasn't come

off, that you are free, that you are not quite lost for humanity.

. . . you see, I've spoken my mind!"



"Because I don't want in your free marriage to be made a fool of and

to bring up another man's children, that's why I want legal marriage,"

Luzhin replied in order to make some answer.



He seemed preoccupied by something.



"Children? You referred to children," Lebeziatnikov started off like a

warhorse at the trumpet call. "Children are a social question and a

question of first importance, I agree; but the question of children

has another solution. Some refuse to have children altogether, because

they suggest the institution of the family. We'll speak of children

later, but now as to the question of honour, I confess that's my weak

point. That horrid, military, Pushkin expression is unthinkable in the

dictionary of the future. What does it mean indeed? It's nonsense,

there will be no deception in a free marriage! That is only the

natural consequence of a legal marriage, so to say, its corrective, a

protest. So that indeed it's not humiliating . . . and if I ever, to

suppose an absurdity, were to be legally married, I should be

positively glad of it. I should say to my wife: 'My dear, hitherto I

have loved you, now I respect you, for you've shown you can protest!'

You laugh! That's because you are of incapable of getting away from

prejudices. Confound it all! I understand now where the unpleasantness

is of being deceived in a legal marriage, but it's simply a despicable

consequence of a despicable position in which both are humiliated.

When the deception is open, as in a free marriage, then it does not

exist, it's unthinkable. Your wife will only prove how she respects

you by considering you incapable of opposing her happiness and

avenging yourself on her for her new husband. Damn it all! I sometimes

dream if I were to be married, pfoo! I mean if I were to marry,

legally or not, it's just the same, I should present my wife with a

lover if she had not found one for herself. 'My dear,' I should say,

'I love you, but even more than that I desire you to respect me. See!'

Am I not right?"



Pyotr Petrovitch sniggered as he listened, but without much merriment.

He hardly heard it indeed. He was preoccupied with something else and

even Lebeziatnikov at last noticed it. Pyotr Petrovitch seemed excited

and rubbed his hands. Lebeziatnikov remembered all this and reflected

upon it afterwards.







CHAPTER II



It would be difficult to explain exactly what could have originated

the idea of that senseless dinner in Katerina Ivanovna's disordered

brain. Nearly ten of the twenty roubles, given by Raskolnikov for

Marmeladov's funeral, were wasted upon it. Possibly Katerina Ivanovna

felt obliged to honour the memory of the deceased "suitably," that all

the lodgers, and still more Amalia Ivanovna, might know "that he was

in no way their inferior, and perhaps very much their superior," and

that no one had the right "to turn up his nose at him." Perhaps the

chief element was that peculiar "poor man's pride," which compels many

poor people to spend their last savings on some traditional social

ceremony, simply in order to do "like other people," and not to "be

looked down upon." It is very probable, too, that Katerina Ivanovna

longed on this occasion, at the moment when she seemed to be abandoned

by everyone, to show those "wretched contemptible lodgers" that she

knew "how to do things, how to entertain" and that she had been

brought up "in a genteel, she might almost say aristocratic colonel's

family" and had not been meant for sweeping floors and washing the

children's rags at night. Even the poorest and most broken-spirited

people are sometimes liable to these paroxysms of pride and vanity

which take the form of an irresistible nervous craving. And Katerina

Ivanovna was not broken-spirited; she might have been killed by

circumstance, but her spirit could not have been broken, that is, she

could not have been intimidated, her will could not be crushed.

Moreover Sonia had said with good reason that her mind was unhinged.

She could not be said to be insane, but for a year past she had been

so harassed that her mind might well be overstrained. The later stages

of consumption are apt, doctors tell us, to affect the intellect.



There was no great variety of wines, nor was there Madeira; but wine

there was. There was vodka, rum and Lisbon wine, all of the poorest

quality but in sufficient quantity. Besides the traditional rice and

honey, there were three or four dishes, one of which consisted of

pancakes, all prepared in Amalia Ivanovna's kitchen. Two samovars were

boiling, that tea and punch might be offered after dinner. Katerina

Ivanovna had herself seen to purchasing the provisions, with the help

of one of the lodgers, an unfortunate little Pole who had somehow been

stranded at Madame Lippevechsel's. He promptly put himself at Katerina

Ivanovna's disposal and had been all that morning and all the day

before running about as fast as his legs could carry him, and very

anxious that everyone should be aware of it. For every trifle he ran

to Katerina Ivanovna, even hunting her out at the bazaar, at every

instant called her "/Pani/." She was heartily sick of him before the

end, though she had declared at first that she could not have got on

without this "serviceable and magnanimous man." It was one of Katerina

Ivanovna's characteristics to paint everyone she met in the most

glowing colours. Her praises were so exaggerated as sometimes to be

embarrassing; she would invent various circumstances to the credit of

her new acquaintance and quite genuinely believe in their reality.

Then all of a sudden she would be disillusioned and would rudely and

contemptuously repulse the person she had only a few hours before been

literally adoring. She was naturally of a gay, lively and peace-loving

disposition, but from continual failures and misfortunes she had come

to desire so /keenly/ that all should live in peace and joy and should

not /dare/ to break the peace, that the slightest jar, the smallest

disaster reduced her almost to frenzy, and she would pass in an

instant from the brightest hopes and fancies to cursing her fate and

raving, and knocking her head against the wall.



Amalia Ivanovna, too, suddenly acquired extraordinary importance in

Katerina Ivanovna's eyes and was treated by her with extraordinary

respect, probably only because Amalia Ivanovna had thrown herself

heart and soul into the preparations. She had undertaken to lay the

table, to provide the linen, crockery, etc., and to cook the dishes in

her kitchen, and Katerina Ivanovna had left it all in her hands and

gone herself to the cemetery. Everything had been well done. Even the

table-cloth was nearly clean; the crockery, knives, forks and glasses

were, of course, of all shapes and patterns, lent by different

lodgers, but the table was properly laid at the time fixed, and Amalia

Ivanovna, feeling she had done her work well, had put on a black silk

dress and a cap with new mourning ribbons and met the returning party

with some pride. This pride, though justifiable, displeased Katerina

Ivanovna for some reason: "as though the table could not have been

laid except by Amalia Ivanovna!" She disliked the cap with new

ribbons, too. "Could she be stuck up, the stupid German, because she

was mistress of the house, and had consented as a favour to help her

poor lodgers! As a favour! Fancy that! Katerina Ivanovna's father who

had been a colonel and almost a governor had sometimes had the table

set for forty persons, and then anyone like Amalia Ivanovna, or rather

Ludwigovna, would not have been allowed into the kitchen."



Katerina Ivanovna, however, put off expressing her feelings for the

time and contented herself with treating her coldly, though she

decided inwardly that she would certainly have to put Amalia Ivanovna

down and set her in her proper place, for goodness only knew what she

was fancying herself. Katerina Ivanovna was irritated too by the fact

that hardly any of the lodgers invited had come to the funeral, except

the Pole who had just managed to run into the cemetery, while to the

memorial dinner the poorest and most insignificant of them had turned

up, the wretched creatures, many of them not quite sober. The older

and more respectable of them all, as if by common consent, stayed

away. Pyotr Petrovitch Luzhin, for instance, who might be said to be

the most respectable of all the lodgers, did not appear, though

Katerina Ivanovna had the evening before told all the world, that is

Amalia Ivanovna, Polenka, Sonia and the Pole, that he was the most

generous, noble-hearted man with a large property and vast

connections, who had been a friend of her first husband's, and a guest

in her father's house, and that he had promised to use all his

influence to secure her a considerable pension. It must be noted that

when Katerina Ivanovna exalted anyone's connections and fortune, it

was without any ulterior motive, quite disinterestedly, for the mere

pleasure of adding to the consequence of the person praised. Probably

"taking his cue" from Luzhin, "that contemptible wretch Lebeziatnikov

had not turned up either. What did he fancy himself? He was only asked

out of kindness and because he was sharing the same room with Pyotr

Petrovitch and was a friend of his, so that it would have been awkward

not to invite him."



Among those who failed to appear were "the genteel lady and her old-

maidish daughter," who had only been lodgers in the house for the last

fortnight, but had several times complained of the noise and uproar in

Katerina Ivanovna's room, especially when Marmeladov had come back

drunk. Katerina Ivanovna heard this from Amalia Ivanovna who,

quarrelling with Katerina Ivanovna, and threatening to turn the whole

family out of doors, had shouted at her that they "were not worth the

foot" of the honourable lodgers whom they were disturbing. Katerina

Ivanovna determined now to invite this lady and her daughter, "whose

foot she was not worth," and who had turned away haughtily when she

casually met them, so that they might know that "she was more noble in

her thoughts and feelings and did not harbour malice," and might see

that she was not accustomed to her way of living. She had proposed to

make this clear to them at dinner with allusions to her late father's

governorship, and also at the same time to hint that it was

exceedingly stupid of them to turn away on meeting her. The fat

colonel-major (he was really a discharged officer of low rank) was

also absent, but it appeared that he had been "not himself" for the

last two days. The party consisted of the Pole, a wretched looking

clerk with a spotty face and a greasy coat, who had not a word to say

for himself, and smelt abominably, a deaf and almost blind old man who

had once been in the post office and who had been from immemorial ages

maintained by someone at Amalia Ivanovna's.



A retired clerk of the commissariat department came, too; he was

drunk, had a loud and most unseemly laugh and only fancy--was without

a waistcoat! One of the visitors sat straight down to the table

without even greeting Katerina Ivanovna. Finally one person having no

suit appeared in his dressing-gown, but this was too much, and the

efforts of Amalia Ivanovna and the Pole succeeded in removing him. The

Pole brought with him, however, two other Poles who did not live at

Amalia Ivanovna's and whom no one had seen here before. All this

irritated Katerina Ivanovna intensely. "For whom had they made all

these preparations then?" To make room for the visitors the children

had not even been laid for at the table; but the two little ones were

sitting on a bench in the furthest corner with their dinner laid on a

box, while Polenka as a big girl had to look after them, feed them,

and keep their noses wiped like well-bred children's.



Katerina Ivanovna, in fact, could hardly help meeting her guests with

increased dignity, and even haughtiness. She stared at some of them

with special severity, and loftily invited them to take their seats.

Rushing to the conclusion that Amalia Ivanovna must be responsible for

those who were absent, she began treating her with extreme

nonchalance, which the latter promptly observed and resented. Such a

beginning was no good omen for the end. All were seated at last.



Raskolnikov came in almost at the moment of their return from the

cemetery. Katerina Ivanovna was greatly delighted to see him, in the

first place, because he was the one "educated visitor, and, as

everyone knew, was in two years to take a professorship in the

university," and secondly because he immediately and respectfully

apologised for having been unable to be at the funeral. She positively

pounced upon him, and made him sit on her left hand (Amalia Ivanovna

was on her right). In spite of her continual anxiety that the dishes

should be passed round correctly and that everyone should taste them,

in spite of the agonising cough which interrupted her every minute and

seemed to have grown worse during the last few days, she hastened to

pour out in a half whisper to Raskolnikov all her suppressed feelings

and her just indignation at the failure of the dinner, interspersing

her remarks with lively and uncontrollable laughter at the expense of

her visitors and especially of her landlady.



"It's all that cuckoo's fault! You know whom I mean? Her, her!"

Katerina Ivanovna nodded towards the landlady. "Look at her, she's

making round eyes, she feels that we are talking about her and can't

understand. Pfoo, the owl! Ha-ha! (Cough-cough-cough.) And what does

she put on that cap for? (Cough-cough-cough.) Have you noticed that

she wants everyone to consider that she is patronising me and doing me

an honour by being heLudwigovna,

"that her /Vater/ was named Johann and that he was a burgomeister, and

that Katerina Ivanovna's /Vater/ was quite never a burgomeister."

Katerina Ivanovna rose from her chair, and with a stern and apparently

calm voice (though she was pale and her chest was heaving) observed

that "if she dared for one moment to set her contemptible wretch of a

father on a level with her papa, she, Katerina Ivanovna, would tear

her cap off her head and trample it under foot." Amalia Ivanovna ran

about the room, shouting at the top of her voice, that she was

mistress of the house and that Katerina Ivanovna should leave the

lodgings that minute; then she rushed for some reason to collect the

silver spoons from the table. There was a great outcry and uproar, the

children began crying. Sonia ran to restrain Katerina Ivanovna, but

when Amalia Ivanovna shouted something about "the yellow ticket,"

Katerina Ivanovna pushed Sonia away, and rushed at the landlady to

carry out her threat.



At that minute the door opened, and Pyotr Petrovitch Luzhin appeared

on the threshold. He stood scanning the party with severe and vigilant

eyes. Katerina Ivanovna rushed to him.







CHAPTER III



"Pyotr Petrovitch," she cried, "protect me . . . you at least! Make

this foolish woman understand that she can't behave like this to a

lady in misfortune . . . that there is a law for such things. . . .

I'll go to the governor-general himself. . . . She shall answer for

it. . . . Remembering my father's hospitality protect these orphans."



"Allow me, madam. . . . Allow me." Pyotr Petrovitch waved her off.

"Your papa as you are well aware I had not the honour of knowing"

(someone laughed aloud) "and I do not intend to take part in your

everlasting squabbles with Amalia Ivanovna. . . . I have come here to

speak of my own affairs . . . and I want to have a word with your

stepdaughter, Sofya . . . Ivanovna, I think it is? Allow me to pass."



Pyotr Petrovitch, edging by her, went to the opposite corner where

Sonia was.



Katerina Ivanovna remained standing where she was, as though

thunderstruck. She could not understand how Pyotr Petrovitch could

deny having enjoyed her father's hospitility. Though she had invented

it herself, she believed in it firmly by this time. She was struck too

by the businesslike, dry and even contemptuous menacing tone of Pyotr

Petrovitch. All the clamour gradually died away at his entrance. Not

only was this "serious business man" strikingly incongruous with the

rest of the party, but it was evident, too, that he had come upon some

matter of consequence, that some exceptional cause must have brought

him and that therefore something was going to happen. Raskolnikov,

standing beside Sonia, moved aside to let him pass; Pyotr Petrovitch

did not seem to notice him. A minute later Lebeziatnikov, too,

appeared in the doorway; he did not come in, but stood still,

listening with marked interest, almost wonder, and seemed for a time

perplexed.



"Excuse me for possibly interrupting you, but it's a matter of some

importance," Pyotr Petrovitch observed, addressing the company

generally. "I am glad indeed to find other persons present. Amalia

Ivanovna, I humbly beg you as mistress of the house to pay careful

attention to what I have to say to Sofya Ivanovna. Sofya Ivanovna," he

went on, addressing Sonia, who was very much surprised and already

alarmed, "immediately after your visit I found that a hundred-rouble

note was missing from my table, in the room of my friend Mr.

Lebeziatnikov. If in any way whatever you know and will tell us where

it is now, I assure you on my word of honour and call all present to

witness that the matter shall end there. In the opposite case I shall

be compelled to have recourse to very serious measures and then . . .

you must blame yourself."



Complete silence reigned in the room. Even the crying children were

still. Sonia stood deadly pale, staring at Luzhin and unable to say a

word. She seemed not to understand. Some seconds passed.



"Well, how is it to be then?" asked Luzhin, looking intently at her.



"I don't know. . . . I know nothing about it," Sonia articulated

faintly at last.



"No, you know nothing?" Luzhin repeated and again he paused for some

seconds. "Think a moment, mademoiselle," he began severely, but still,

as it were, admonishing her. "Reflect, I am prepared to give you time

for consideration. Kindly observe this: if I were not so entirely

convinced I should not, you may be sure, with my experience venture to

accuse you so directly. Seeing that for such direct accusation before

witnesses, if false or even mistaken, I should myself in a certain

sense be made responsible, I am aware of that. This morning I changed

for my own purposes several five-per-cent securities for the sum of

approximately three thousand roubles. The account is noted down in my

pocket-book. On my return home I proceeded to count the money--as Mr.

Lebeziatnikov will bear witness--and after counting two thousand three

hundred roubles I put the rest in my pocket-book in my coat pocket.

About five hundred roubles remained on the table and among them three

notes of a hundred roubles each. At that moment you entered (at my

invitation)--and all the time you were present you were exceedingly

embarrassed; so that three times you jumped up in the middle of the

conversation and tried to make off. Mr. Lebeziatnikov can bear witness

to this. You yourself, mademoiselle, probably will not refuse to

confirm my statement that I invited you through Mr. Lebeziatnikov,

solely in order to discuss with you the hopeless and destitute

position of your relative, Katerina Ivanovna (whose dinner I was

unable to attend), and the advisability of getting up something of the

nature of a subscription, lottery or the like, for her benefit. You

thanked me and even shed tears. I describe all this as it took place,

primarily to recall it to your mind and secondly to show you that not

the slightest detail has escaped my recollection. Then I took a ten-

rouble note from the table and handed it to you by way of first

instalment on my part for the benefit of your relative. Mr.

Lebeziatnikov saw all this. Then I accompanied you to the door--you

being still in the same state of embarrassment--after which, being

left alone with Mr. Lebeziatnikov I talked to him for ten minutes--

then Mr. Lebeziatnikov went out and I returned to the table with the

money lying on it, intending to count it and to put it aside, as I

proposed doing before. To my surprise one hundred-rouble note had

disappeared. Kindly consider the position. Mr. Lebeziatnikov I cannot

suspect. I am ashamed to allude to such a supposition. I cannot have

made a mistake in my reckoning, for the minute before your entrance I

had finished my accounts and found the total correct. You will admit

that recollecting your embarrassment, your eagerness to get away and

the fact that you kept your hands for some time on the table, and

taking into consideration your social position and the habits

associated with it, I was, so to say, with horror and positively

against my will, /compelled/ to entertain a suspicion--a cruel, but

justifiable suspicion! I will add further and repeat that in spite of

my positive conviction, I realise that I run a certain risk in making

this accusation, but as you see, I could not let it pass. I have taken

action and I will tell you why: solely, madam, solely, owing to your

black ingratitude! Why! I invite you for the benefit of your destitute

relative, I present you with my donation of ten roubles and you, on

the spot, repay me for all that with such an action. It is too bad!

You need a lesson. Reflect! Moreover, like a true friend I beg you--

and you could have no better friend at this moment--think what you are

doing, otherwise I shall be immovable! Well, what do you say?"



"I have taken nothing," Sonia whispered in terror, "you gave me ten

roubles, here it is, take it."



Sonia pulled her handkerchief out of her pocket, untied a corner of

it, took out the ten-rouble note and gave it to Luzhin.



"And the hundred roubles you do not confess to taking?" he insisted

reproachfully, not taking the note.



Sonia looked about her. All were looking at her with such awful,

stern, ironical, hostile eyes. She looked at Raskolnikov . . . he

stood against the wall, with his arms crossed, looking at her with

glowing eyes.



"Good God!" broke from Sonia.



"Amalia Ivanovna, we shall have to send word to the police and

therefore I humbly beg you meanwhile to send for the house porter,"

Luzhin said softly and even kindly.



"/Gott der Barmherzige/! I knew she was the thief," cried Amalia

Ivanovna, throwing up her hands.



"You knew it?" Luzhin caught her up, "then I suppose you had some

reason before this for thinking so. I beg you, worthy Amalia Ivanovna,

to remember your words which have been uttered before witnesses."



There was a buzz of loud conversation on all sides. All were in

movement.



"What!" cried Katerina Ivanovna, suddenly realising the position, and

she rushed at Luzhin. "What! You accuse her of stealing? Sonia? Ah,

the wretches, the wretches!"



And running to Sonia she flung her wasted arms round her and held her

as in a vise.



"Sonia! how dared you take ten roubles from him? Foolish girl! Give it

to me! Give me the ten roubles at once--here!



And snatching the note from Sonia, Katerina Ivanovna crumpled it up

and flung it straight into Luzhin's face. It hit him in the eye and

fell on the ground. Amalia Ivanovna hastened to pick it up. Pyotr

Petrovitch lost his temper.



"Hold that mad woman!" he shouted.



At that moment several other persons, besides Lebeziatnikov, appeared

in the doorway, among them the two ladies.



"What! Mad? Am I mad? Idiot!" shrieked Katerina Ivanovna. "You are an

idiot yourself, pettifogging lawyer, base man! Sonia, Sonia take his

money! Sonia a thief! Why, she'd give away her last penny!" and

Katerina Ivanovna broke into hysterical laughter. "Did you ever see

such an idiot?" she turned from side to side. "And you too?" she

suddenly saw the landlady, "and you too, sausage eater, you declare

that she is a thief, you trashy Prussian hen's leg in a crinoline! She

hasn't been out of this room: she came straight from you, you wretch,

and sat down beside me, everyone saw her. She sat here, by Rodion

Romanovitch. Search her! Since she's not left the room, the money

would have to be on her! Search her, search her! But if you don't find

it, then excuse me, my dear fellow, you'll answer for it! I'll go to

our Sovereign, to our Sovereign, to our gracious Tsar himself, and

throw myself at his feet, to-day, this minute! I am alone in the

world! They would let me in! Do you think they wouldn't? You're wrong,

I will get in! I will get in! You reckoned on her meekness! You relied

upon that! But I am not so submissive, let me tell you! You've gone

too far yourself. Search her, search her!"



And Katerina Ivanovna in a frenzy shook Luzhin and dragged him towards

Sonia.



"I am ready, I'll be responsible . . . but calm yourself, madam, calm

yourself. I see that you are not so submissive! . . . Well, well, but

as to that . . ." Luzhin muttered, "that ought to be before the police

. . . though indeed there are witnesses enough as it is. . . . I am

ready. . . . But in any case it's difficult for a man . . . on account

of her sex. . . . But with the help of Amalia Ivanovna . . . though,

of course, it's not the way to do things. . . . How is it to be done?"



"As you will! Let anyone who likes search her!" cried Katerina

Ivanovna. "Sonia, turn out your pockets! See! Look, monster, the

pocket is empty, here was her handkerchief! Here is the other pocket,

look! D'you see, d'you see?"



And Katerina Ivanovna turned--or rather snatched--both pockets inside

out. But from the right pocket a piece of paper flew out and

describing a parabola in the air fell at Luzhin's feet. Everyone saw

it, several cried out. Pyotr Petrovitch stooped down, picked up the

paper in two fingers, lifted it where all could see it and opened it.

It was a hundred-rouble note folded in eight. Pyotr Petrovitch held up

the note showing it to everyone.



"Thief! Out of my lodging. Police, police!" yelled Amalia Ivanovna.

"They must to Siberia be sent! Away!"



Exclamations arose on all sides. Raskolnikov was silent, keeping his

eyes fixed on Sonia, except for an occasional rapid glance at Luzhin.

Sonia stood still, as though unconscious. She was hardly able to feel

surprise. Suddenly the colour rushed to her cheeks; she uttered a cry

and hid her face in her hands.



"No, it wasn't I! I didn't take it! I know nothing about it," she

cried with a heartrending wail, and she ran to Katerina Ivanovna, who

clasped her tightly in her arms, as though she would shelter her from

all the world.



"Sonia! Sonia! I don't believe it! You see, I don't believe it!" she

cried in the face of the obvious fact, swaying her to and fro in her

arms like a baby, kissing her face continually, then snatching at her

hands and kissing them, too, "you took it! How stupid these people

are! Oh dear! You are fools, fools," she cried, addressing the whole

room, "you don't know, you don't know what a heart she has, what a

girl she is! She take it, she? She'd sell her last rag, she'd go

barefoot to help you if you needed it, that's what she is! She has the

yellow passport because my children were starving, she sold herself

for us! Ah, husband, husband! Do you see? Do you see? What a memorial

dinner for you! Merciful heavens! Defend her, why are you all standing

still? Rodion Romanovitch, why don't you stand up for her? Do you

believe it, too? You are not worth her little finger, all of you

together! Good God! Defend her now, at least!"



The wail of the poor, consumptive, helpless woman seemed to produce a

great effect on her audience. The agonised, wasted, consumptive face,

the parched blood-stained lips, the hoarse voice, the tears

unrestrained as a child's, the trustful, childish and yet despairing

prayer for help were so piteous that everyone seemed to feel for her.

Pyotr Petrovitch at any rate was at once moved to /compassion/.



"Madam, madam, this incident does not reflect upon you!" he cried

impressively, "no one would take upon himself to accuse you of being

an instigator or even an accomplice in it, especially as you have

proved her guilt by turning out her pockets, showing that you had no

previous idea of it. I am most ready, most ready to show compassion,

if poverty, so to speak, drove Sofya Semyonovna to it, but why did you

refuse to confess, mademoiselle? Were you afraid of the disgrace? The

first step? You lost your head, perhaps? One can quite understand it.

. . . But how could you have lowered yourself to such an action?

Gentlemen," he addressed the whole company, "gentlemen! Compassionate

and, so to say, commiserating these people, I am ready to overlook it

even now in spite of the personal insult lavished upon me! And may

this disgrace be a lesson to you for the future," he said, addressing

Sonia, "and I will carry the matter no further. Enough!"



Pyotr Petrovitch stole a glance at Raskolnikov. Their eyes met, and

the fire in Raskolnikov's seemed ready to reduce him to ashes.

Meanwhile Katerina Ivanovna apparently heard nothing. She was kissing

and hugging Sonia like a madwoman. The children, too, were embracing

Sonia on all sides, and Polenka--though she did not fully understand

what was wrong--was drowned in tears and shaking with sobs, as she hid

her pretty little face, swollen with weeping, on Sonia's shoulder.



"How vile!" a loud voice cried suddenly in the doorway.



Pyotr Petrovitch looked round quickly.



"What vileness!" Lebeziatnikov repeated, staring him straight in the

face.



Pyotr Petrovitch gave a positive start--all noticed it and recalled it

afterwards. Lebeziatnikov strode into the room.



"And you dared to call me as witness?" he said, going up to Pyotr

Petrovitch.



"What do you mean? What are you talking about?" muttered Luzhin.



"I mean that you . . . are a slanderer, that's what my words mean!"

Lebeziatnikov said hotly, looking sternly at him with his short-

sighted eyes.



He was extremely angry. Raskolnikov gazed intently at him, as though

seizing and weighing each word. Again there was a silence. Pyotr

Petrovitch indeed seemed almost dumbfounded for the first moment.



"If you mean that for me, . . ." he began, stammering. "But what's the

matter with you? Are you out of your mind?"



"I'm in my mind, but you are a scoundrel! Ah, how vile! I have heard

everything. I kept waiting on purpose to understand it, for I must own

even now it is not quite logical. . . . What you have done it all for

I can't understand."



"Why, what have I done then? Give over talking in your nonsensical

riddles! Or maybe you are drunk!"



"You may be a drunkard, perhaps, vile man, but I am not! I never touch

vodka, for it's against my convictions. Would you believe it, he, he

himself, with his own hands gave Sofya Semyonovna that hundred-rouble

note--I saw it, I was a witness, I'll take my oath! He did it, he!"

repeated Lebeziatnikov, addressing all.



"Are you crazy, milksop?" squealed Luzhin. "She is herself before you

--she herself here declared just now before everyone that I gave her

only ten roubles. How could I have given it to her?"



"I saw it, I saw it," Lebeziatnikov repeated, "and though it is

against my principles, I am ready this very minute to take any oath

you like before the court, for I saw how you slipped it in her pocket.

Only like a fool I thought you did it out of kindness! When you were

saying good-bye to her at the door, while you held her hand in one

hand, with the other, the left, you slipped the note into her pocket.

I saw it, I saw it!"



Luzhin turned pale.



"What lies!" he cried impudently, "why, how could you, standing by the

window, see the note? You fancied it with your short-sighted eyes. You

are raving!"



"No, I didn't fancy it. And though I was standing some way off, I saw

it all. And though it certainly would be hard to distinguish a note

from the window--that's true--I knew for certain that it was a

hundred-rouble note, because, when you were going to give Sofya

Semyonovna ten roubles, you took up from the table a hundred-rouble

note (I saw it because I was standing near then, and an idea struck me

at once, so that I did not forget you had it in your hand). You folded

it and kept it in your hand all the time. I didn't think of it again

until, when you were getting up, you changed it from your right hand

to your left and nearly dropped it! I noticed it because the same idea

struck me again, that you meant to do her a kindness without my

seeing. You can fancy how I watched you and I saw how you succeeded in

slipping it into her pocket. I saw it, I saw it, I'll take my oath."



Lebeziatnikov was almost breathless. Exclamations arose on all hands

chiefly expressive of wonder, but some were menacing in tone. They all

crowded round Pyotr Petrovitch. Katerina Ivanovna flew to

Lebeziatnikov.



"I was mistaken in you! Protect her! You are the only one to take her

part! She is an orphan. God has sent you!"



Katerina Ivanovna, hardly knowing what she was doing, sank on her

knees before him.



"A pack of nonsense!" yelled Luzhin, roused to fury, "it's all

nonsense you've been talking! 'An idea struck you, you didn't think,

you noticed'--what does it amount to? So I gave it to her on the sly

on purpose? What for? With what object? What have I to do with

this . . .?"



"What for? That's what I can't understand, but that what I am telling

you is the fact, that's certain! So far from my being mistaken, you

infamous criminal man, I remember how, on account of it, a question

occurred to me at once, just when I was thanking you and pressing your

hand. What made you put it secretly in her pocket? Why you did it

secretly, I mean? Could it be simply to conceal it from me, knowing

that my convictions are opposed to yours and that I do not approve of

private benevolence, which effects no radical cure? Well, I decided

that you really were ashamed of giving such a large sum before me.

Perhaps, too, I thought, he wants to give her a surprise, when she

finds a whole hundred-rouble note in her pocket. (For I know, some

benevolent people are very fond of decking out their charitable

actions in that way.) Then the idea struck me, too, that you wanted to

test her, to see whether, when she found it, she would come to thank

you. Then, too, that you wanted to avoid thanks and that, as the

saying is, your right hand should not know . . . something of that

sort, in fact. I thought of so many possibilities that I put off

considering it, but still thought it indelicate to show you that I

knew your secret. But another idea struck me again that Sofya

Semyonovna might easily lose the money before she noticed it, that was

why I decided to come in here to call her out of the room and to tell

her that you put a hundred roubles in her pocket. But on my way I went

first to Madame Kobilatnikov's to take them the 'General Treatise on

the Positive Method' and especially to recommend Piderit's article

(and also Wagner's); then I come on here and what a state of things I

find! Now could I, could I, have all these ideas and reflections if I

had not seen you put the hundred-rouble note in her pocket?"



When Lebeziatnikov finished his long-winded harangue with the logical

deduction at the end, he was quite tired, and the perspiration

streamed from his face. He could not, alas, even express himself

correctly in Russian, though he knew no other language, so that he was

quite exhausted, almost emaciated after this heroic exploit. But his

speech produced a powerful effect. He had spoken with such vehemence,

with such conviction that everyone obviously believed him. Pyotr

Petrovitch felt that things were going badly with him.



"What is it to do with me if silly ideas did occur to you?" he

shouted, "that's no evidence. You may have dreamt it, that's all! And

I tell you, you are lying, sir. You are lying and slandering from some

spite against me, simply from pique, because I did not agree with your

free-thinking, godless, social propositions!"



But this retort did not benefit Pyotr Petrovitch. Murmurs of

disapproval were heard on all sides.



"Ah, that's your line now, is it!" cried Lebeziatnikov, "that's

nonsense! Call the police and I'll take my oath! There's only one

thing I can't understand: what made him risk such a contemptible

action. Oh, pitiful, despicable man!"



"I can explain why he risked such an action, and if necessary, I, too,

will swear to it," Raskolnikov said at last in a firm voice, and he

stepped forward.



He appeared to be firm and composed. Everyone felt clearly, from the

very look of him that he really knew about it and that the mystery

would be solved.



"Now I can explain it all to myself," said Raskolnikov, addressing

Lebeziatnikov. "From the very beginning of the business, I suspected

that there was some scoundrelly intrigue at the bottom of it. I began

to suspect it from some special circumstances known to me only, which

I will explain at once to everyone: they account for everything. Your

valuable evidence has finally made everything clear to me. I beg all,

all to listen. This gentleman (he pointed to Luzhin) was recently

engaged to be married to a young lady--my sister, Avdotya Romanovna

Raskolnikov. But coming to Petersburg he quarrelled with me, the day

before yesterday, at our first meeting and I drove him out of my room

--I have two witnesses to prove it. He is a very spiteful man. . . .

The day before yesterday I did not know that he was staying here, in

your room, and that consequently on the very day we quarrelled--the

day before yesterday--he saw me give Katerina Ivanovna some money for

the funeral, as a friend of the late Mr. Marmeladov. He at once wrote

a note to my mother and informed her that I had given away all my

money, not to Katerina Ivanovna but to Sofya Semyonovna, and referred

in a most contemptible way to the . . . character of Sofya Semyonovna,

that is, hinted at the character of my attitude to Sofya Semyonovna.

All this you understand was with the object of dividing me from my

mother and sister, by insinuating that I was squandering on unworthy

objects the money which they had sent me and which was all they had.

Yesterday evening, before my mother and sister and in his presence, I

declared that I had given the money to Katerina Ivanovna for the

funeral and not to Sofya Semyonovna and that I had no acquaintance

with Sofya Semyonovna and had never seen her before, indeed. At the

same time I added that he, Pyotr Petrovitch Luzhin, with all his

virtues, was not worth Sofya Semyonovna's little finger, though he

spoke so ill of her. To his question--would I let Sofya Semyonovna sit

down beside my sister, I answered that I had already done so that day.

Irritated that my mother and sister were unwilling to quarrel with me

at his insinuations, he gradually began being unpardonably rude to

them. A final rupture took place and he was turned out of the house.

All this happened yesterday evening. Now I beg your special attention:

consider: if he had now succeeded in proving that Sofya Semyonovna was

a thief, he would have shown to my mother and sister that he was

almost right in his suspicions, that he had reason to be angry at my

putting my sister on a level with Sofya Semyonovna, that, in attacking

me, he was protecting and preserving the honour of my sister, his

betrothed. In fact he might even, through all this, have been able to

estrange me from my family, and no doubt he hoped to be restored to

favour with them; to say nothing of revenging himself on me

personally, for he has grounds for supposing that the honour and

happiness of Sofya Semyonovna are very precious to me. That was what

he was working for! That's how I understand it. That's the whole

reason for it and there can be no other!"



It was like this, or somewhat like this, that Raskolnikov wound up his

speech which was followed very attentively, though often interrupted

by exclamations from his audience. But in spite of interruptions he

spoke clearly, calmly, exactly, firmly. His decisive voice, his tone

of conviction and his stern face made a great impression on everyone.



"Yes, yes, that's it," Lebeziatnikov assented gleefully, "that must be

it, for he asked me, as soon as Sofya Semyonovna came into our room,

whether you were here, whether I had seen you among Katerina

Ivanovna's guests. He called me aside to the window and asked me in

secret. It was essential for him that you should be here! That's it,

that's it!"



Luzhin smiled contemptuously and did not speak. But he was very pale.

He seemed to be deliberating on some means of escape. Perhaps he would

have been glad to give up everything and get away, but at the moment

this was scarcely possible. It would have implied admitting the truth

of the accusations brought against him. Moreover, the company, which

had already been excited by drink, was now too much stirred to allow

it. The commissariat clerk, though indeed he had not grasped the whole

position, was shouting louder than anyone and was making some

suggestions very unpleasant to Luzhin. But not all those present were

drunk; lodgers came in from all the rooms. The three Poles were

tremendously excited and were continually shouting at him: "The /pan/

is a /lajdak/!" and muttering threats in Polish. Sonia had been

listening with strained attention, though she too seemed unable to

grasp it all; she seemed as though she had just returned to

consciousness. She did not take her eyes off Raskolnikov, feeling that

all her safety lay in him. Katerina Ivanovna breathed hard and

painfully and seemed fearfully exhausted. Amalia Ivanovna stood

looking more stupid than anyone, with her mouth wide open, unable to

make out what had happened. She only saw that Pyotr Petrovitch had

somehow come to grief.



Raskolnikov was attempting to speak again, but they did not let him.

Everyone was crowding round Luzhin with threats and shouts of abuse.

But Pyotr Petrovitch was not intimidated. Seeing that his accusation

of Sonia had completely failed, he had recourse to insolence:



"Allow me, gentlemen, allow me! Don't squeeze, let me pass!" he said,

making his way through the crowd. "And no threats, if you please! I

assure you it will be useless, you will gain nothing by it. On the

contrary, you'll have to answer, gentlemen, for violently obstructing

the course of justice. The thief has been more than unmasked, and I

shall prosecute. Our judges are not so blind and . . . not so drunk,

and will not believe the testimony of two notorious infidels,

agitators, and atheists, who accuse me from motives of personal

revenge which they are foolish enough to admit. . . . Yes, allow me to

pass!"



"Don't let me find a trace of you in my room! Kindly leave at once,

and everything is at an end between us! When I think of the trouble

I've been taking, the way I've been expounding . . . all this

fortnight!"



"I told you myself to-day that I was going, when you tried to keep me;

now I will simply add that you are a fool. I advise you to see a

doctor for your brains and your short sight. Let me pass, gentlemen!"



He forced his way through. But the commissariat clerk was unwilling to

let him off so easily: he picked up a glass from the table, brandished

it in the air and flung it at Pyotr Petrovitch; but the glass flew

straight at Amalia Ivanovna. She screamed, and the clerk,

overbalancing, fell heavily under the table. Pyotr Petrovitch made his

way to his room and half an hour later had left the house. Sonia,

timid by nature, had felt before that day that she could be ill-

treated more easily than anyone, and that she could be wronged with

impunity. Yet till that moment she had fancied that she might escape

misfortune by care, gentleness and submissiveness before everyone. Her

disappointment was too great. She could, of course, bear with patience

and almost without murmur anything, even this. But for the first

minute she felt it too bitter. In spite of her triumph and her

justification--when her first terror and stupefaction had passed and

she could understand it all clearly--the feeling of her helplessness

and of the wrong done to her made her heart throb with anguish and she

was overcome with hysterical weeping. At last, unable to bear any

more, she rushed out of the room and ran home, almost immediately

after Luzhin's departure. When amidst loud laughter the glass flew at

Amalia Ivanovna, it was more than the landlady could endure. With a

shriek she rushed like a fury at Katerina Ivanovna, considering her to

blame for everything.



"Out of my lodgings! At once! Quick march!"



And with these words she began snatching up everything she could lay

her hands on that belonged to Katerina Ivanovna, and throwing it on

the floor. Katerina Ivanovna, pale, almost fainting, and gasping for

breath, jumped up from the bed where she had sunk in exhaustion and

darted at Amalia Ivanovna. But the battle was too unequal: the

landlady waved her away like a feather.



"What! As though that godless calumny was not enough--this vile

creature attacks me! What! On the day of my husband's funeral I am

turned out of my lodging! After eating my bread and salt she turns me

into the street, with my orphans! Where am I to go?" wailed the poor

woman, sobbing and gasping. "Good God!" she cried with flashing eyes,

"is there no justice upon earth? Whom should you protect if not us

orphans? We shall see! There is law and justice on earth, there is, I

will find it! Wait a bit, godless creature! Polenka, stay with the

children, I'll come back. Wait for me, if you have to wait in the

street. We will see whether there is justice on earth!"



And throwing over her head that green shawl which Marmeladov had

mentioned to Raskolnikov, Katerina Ivanovna squeezed her way through

the disorderly and drunken crowd of lodgers who still filled the room,

and, wailing and tearful, she ran into the street--with a vague

intention of going at once somewhere to find justice. Polenka with the

two little ones in her arms crouched, terrified, on the trunk in the

corner of the room, where she waited trembling for her mother to come

back. Amalia Ivanovna raged about the room, shrieking, lamenting and

throwing everything she came across on the floor. The lodgers talked

incoherently, some commented to the best of their ability on what had

happened, others quarrelled and swore at one another, while others

struck up a song. . . .



"Now it's time for me to go," thought Raskolnikov. "Well, Sofya

Semyonovna, we shall see what you'll say now!"



And he set off in the direction of Sonia's lodgings.







CHAPTER IV



Raskolnikov had been a vigorous and active champion of Sonia against

Luzhin, although he had such a load of horror and anguish in his own

heart. But having gone through so much in the morning, he found a sort

of relief in a change of sensations, apart from the strong personal

feeling which impelled him to defend Sonia. He was agitated too,

especially at some moments, by the thought of his approaching

interview with Sonia: he /had/ to tell her who had killed Lizaveta. He

knew the terrible suffering it would be to him and, as it were,

brushed away the thought of it. So when he cried as he left Katerina

Ivanovna's, "Well, Sofya Semyonovna, we shall see what you'll say

now!" he was still superficially excited, still vigorous and defiant

from his triumph over Luzhin. But, strange to say, by the time he

reached Sonia's lodging, he felt a sudden impotence and fear. He stood

still in hesitation at the door, asking himself the strange question:

"Must he tell her who killed Lizaveta?" It was a strange question

because he felt at the very time not only that he could not help

telling her, but also that he could not put off the telling. He did

not yet know why it must be so, he only /felt/ it, and the agonising

sense of his impotence before the inevitable almost crushed him. To

cut short his hesitation and suffering, he quickly opened the door and

looked at Sonia from the doorway. She was sitting with her elbows on

the table and her face in her hands, but seeing Raskolnikov she got up

at once and came to meet him as though she were expecting him.



"What would have become of me but for you?" she said quickly, meeting

him in the middle of the room.



Evidently she was in haste to say this to him. It was what she had

been waiting for.



Raskolnikov went to the table and sat down on the chair from which she

had only just risen. She stood facing him, two steps away, just as she

had done the day before.



"Well, Sonia?" he said, and felt that his voice was trembling, "it was

all due to 'your social position and the habits associated with it.'

Did you understand that just now?"



Her face showed her distress.



"Only don't talk to me as you did yesterday," she interrupted him.

"Please don't begin it. There is misery enough without that."



She made haste to smile, afraid that he might not like the reproach.



"I was silly to come away from there. What is happening there now? I

wanted to go back directly, but I kept thinking that . . . you would

come."



He told her that Amalia Ivanovna was turning them out of their lodging

and that Katerina Ivanovna had run off somewhere "to seek justice."



"My God!" cried Sonia, "let's go at once. . . ."



And she snatched up her cape.



"It's everlastingly the same thing!" said Raskolnikov, irritably.

"You've no thought except for them! Stay a little with me."



"But . . . Katerina Ivanovna?"



"You won't lose Katerina Ivanovna, you may be sure, she'll come to you

herself since she has run out," he added peevishly. "If she doesn't

find you here, you'll be blamed for it. . . ."



Sonia sat down in painful suspense. Raskolnikov was silent, gazing at

the floor and deliberating.



"This time Luzhin did not want to prosecute you," he began, not

looking at Sonia, "but if he had wanted to, if it had suited his

plans, he would have sent you to prison if it had not been for

Lebeziatnikov and me. Ah?"



"Yes," she assented in a faint voice. "Yes," she repeated, preoccupied

and distressed.



"But I might easily not have been there. And it was quite an accident

Lebeziatnikov's turning up."



Sonia was silent.



"And if you'd gone to prison, what then? Do you remember what I said

yesterday?"



Again she did not answer. He waited.



"I thought you would cry out again 'don't speak of it, leave off.'"

Raskolnikov gave a laugh, but rather a forced one. "What, silence

again?" he asked a minute later. "We must talk about something, you

know. It would be interesting for me to know how you would decide a

certain 'problem' as Lebeziatnikov would say." (He was beginning to

lose the thread.) "No, really, I am serious. Imagine, Sonia, that you

had known all Luzhin's intentions beforehand. Known, that is, for a

fact, that they would be the ruin of Katerina Ivanovna and the

children and yourself thrown in--since you don't count yourself for

anything--Polenka too . . . for she'll go the same way. Well, if

suddenly it all depended on your decision whether he or they should go

on living, that is whether Luzhin should go on living and doing wicked

things, or Katerina Ivanovna should die? How would you decide which of

them was to die? I ask you?"



Sonia looked uneasily at him. There was something peculiar in this

hesitating question, which seemed approaching something in a

roundabout way.



"I felt that you were going to ask some question like that," she said,

looking inquisitively at him.



"I dare say you did. But how is it to be answered?"



"Why do you ask about what could not happen?" said Sonia reluctantly.



"Then it would be better for Luzhin to go on living and doing wicked

things? You haven't dared to decide even that!"



"But I can't know the Divine Providence. . . . And why do you ask what

can't be answered? What's the use of such foolish questions? How could

it happen that it should depend on my decision--who has made me a

judge to decide who is to live and who is not to live?"



"Oh, if the Divine Providence is to be mixed up in it, there is no

doing anything," Raskolnikov grumbled morosely.



"You'd better say straight out what you want!" Sonia cried in

distress. "You are leading up to something again. . . . Can you have

come simply to torture me?"



She could not control herself and began crying bitterly. He looked at

her in gloomy misery. Five minutes passed.



"Of course you're right, Sonia," he said softly at last. He was

suddenly changed. His tone of assumed arrogance and helpless defiance

was gone. Even his voice was suddenly weak. "I told you yesterday that

I was not coming to ask forgiveness and almost the first thing I've

said is to ask forgiveness. . . . I said that about Luzhin and

Providence for my own sake. I was asking forgiveness, Sonia. . . ."



He tried to smile, but there was something helpless and incomplete in

his pale smile. He bowed his head and hid his face in his hands.



And suddenly a strange, surprising sensation of a sort of bitter

hatred for Sonia passed through his heart. As it were wondering and

frightened of this sensation, he raised his head and looked intently

at her; but he met her uneasy and painfully anxious eyes fixed on him;

there was love in them; his hatred vanished like a phantom. It was not

the real feeling; he had taken the one feeling for the other. It only

meant that /that/ minute had come.



He hid his face in his hands again and bowed his head. Suddenly he

turned pale, got up from his chair, looked at Sonia, and without

uttering a word sat down mechanically on her bed.



His sensations that moment were terribly like the moment when he had

stood over the old woman with the axe in his hand and felt that "he

must not lose another minute."



"What's the matter?" asked Sonia, dreadfully frightened.



He could not utter a word. This was not at all, not at all the way he

had intended to "tell" and he did not understand what was happening to

him now. She went up to him, softly, sat down on the bed beside him

and waited, not taking her eyes off him. Her heart throbbed and sank.

It was unendurable; he turned his deadly pale face to her. His lips

worked, helplessly struggling to utter something. A pang of terror

passed through Sonia's heart.



"What's the matter?" she repeated, drawing a little away from him.



"Nothing, Sonia, don't be frightened. . . . It's nonsense. It really

is nonsense, if you think of it," he muttered, like a man in delirium.

"Why have I come to torture you?" he added suddenly, looking at her.

"Why, really? I keep asking myself that question, Sonia. . . ."



He had perhaps been asking himself that question a quarter of an hour

before, but now he spoke helplessly, hardly knowing what he said and

feeling a continual tremor all over.



"Oh, how you are suffering!" she muttered in distress, looking

intently at him.



"It's all nonsense. . . . Listen, Sonia." He suddenly smiled, a pale

helpless smile for two seconds. "You remember what I meant to tell you

yesterday?"



Sonia waited uneasily.



"I said as I went away that perhaps I was saying good-bye for ever,

but that if I came to-day I would tell you who . . . who killed

Lizaveta."



She began trembling all over.



"Well, here I've come to tell you."



"Then you really meant it yesterday?" she whispered with difficulty.

"How do you know?" she asked quickly, as though suddenly regaining her

reason.



Sonia's face grew paler and paler, and she breathed painfully.



"I know."



She paused a minute.



"Have they found him?" she asked timidly.



"No."



"Then how do you know about /it/?" she asked again, hardly audibly and

again after a minute's pause.



He turned to her and looked very intently at her.



"Guess," he said, with the same distorted helpless smile.



A shudder passed over her.



"But you . . . why do you frighten me like this?" she said, smiling

like a child.



"I must be a great friend of /his/ . . . since I know," Raskolnikov

went on, still gazing into her face, as though he could not turn his

eyes away. "He . . . did not mean to kill that Lizaveta . . . he . . .

killed her accidentally. . . . He meant to kill the old woman when she

was alone and he went there . . . and then Lizaveta came in . . . he

killed her too."



Another awful moment passed. Both still gazed at one another.



"You can't guess, then?" he asked suddenly, feeling as though he were

flinging himself down from a steeple.



"N-no . . ." whispered Sonia.



"Take a good look."



As soon as he had said this again, the same familiar sensation froze

his heart. He looked at her and all at once seemed to see in her face

the face of Lizaveta. He remembered clearly the expression in

Lizaveta's face, when he approached her with the axe and she stepped

back to the wall, putting out her hand, with childish terror in her

face, looking as little children do when they begin to be frightened

of something, looking intently and uneasily at what frightens them,

shrinking back and holding out their little hands on the point of

crying. Almost the same thing happened now to Sonia. With the same

helplessness and the same terror, she looked at him for a while and,

suddenly putting out her left hand, pressed her fingers faintly

against his breast and slowly began to get up from the bed, moving

further from him and keeping her eyes fixed even more immovably on

him. Her terror infected him. The same fear showed itself on his face.

In the same way he stared at her and almost with the same /childish/

smile.



"Have you guessed?" he whispered at last.



"Good God!" broke in an awful wail from her bosom.



She sank helplessly on the bed with her face in the pillows, but a

moment later she got up, moved quickly to him, seized both his hands

and, gripping them tight in her thin fingers, began looking into his

face again with the same intent stare. In this last desperate look she

tried to look into him and catch some last hope. But there was no

hope; there was no doubt remaining; it was all true! Later on, indeed,

when she recalled that moment, she thought it strange and wondered why

she had seen at once that there was no doubt. She could not have said,

for instance, that she had foreseen something of the sort--and yet

now, as soon as he told her, she suddenly fancied that she had really

foreseen this very thing.



"Stop, Sonia, enough! don't torture me," he begged her miserably.



It was not at all, not at all like this he had thought of telling her,

but this is how it happened.



She jumped up, seeming not to know what she was doing, and, wringing

her hands, walked into the middle of the room; but quickly went back

and sat down again beside him, her shoulder almost touching his. All

of a sudden she started as though she had been stabbed, uttered a cry

and fell on her knees before him, she did not know why.



"What have you done--what have you done to yourself?" she said in

despair, and, jumping up, she flung herself on his neck, threw her

arms round him, and held him tightly.



Raskolnikov drew back and looked at her with a mournful smile.



"You are a strange girl, Sonia--you kiss me and hug me when I tell you

about that. . . . You don't think what you are doing."



"There is no one--no one in the whole world now so unhappy as you!"

she cried in a frenzy, not hearing what he said, and she suddenly

broke into violent hysterical weeping.



A feeling long unfamiliar to him flooded his heart and softened it at

once. He did not struggle against it. Two tears started into his eyes

and hung on his eyelashes.



"Then you won't leave me, Sonia?" he said, looking at her almost with

hope.



"No, no, never, nowhere!" cried Sonia. "I will follow you, I will

follow you everywhere. Oh, my God! Oh, how miserable I am! . . . Why,

why didn't I know you before! Why didn't you come before? Oh, dear!"



"Here I have come."



"Yes, now! What's to be done now? . . . Together, together!" she

repeated as it were unconsciously, and she hugged him again. "I'll

follow you to Siberia!"



He recoiled at this, and the same hostile, almost haughty smile came

to his lips.



"Perhaps I don't want to go to Siberia yet, Sonia," he said.



Sonia looked at him quickly.



Again after her first passionate, agonising sympathy for the unhappy

man the terrible idea of the murder overwhelmed her. In his changed

tone she seemed to hear the murderer speaking. She looked at him

bewildered. She knew nothing as yet, why, how, with what object it had

been. Now all these questions rushed at once into her mind. And again

she could not believe it: "He, he is a murderer! Could it be true?"



"What's the meaning of it? Where am I?" she said in complete

bewilderment, as though still unable to recover herself. "How could

you, you, a man like you. . . . How could you bring yourself to it?

. . . What does it mean?"



"Oh, well--to plunder. Leave off, Sonia," he answered wearily, almost

with vexation.



Sonia stood as though struck dumb, but suddenly she cried:



"You were hungry! It was . . . to help your mother? Yes?"



"No, Sonia, no," he muttered, turning away and hanging his head. "I

was not so hungry. . . . I certainly did want to help my mother, but

. . . that's not the real thing either. . . . Don't torture me,

Sonia."



Sonia clasped her hands.



"Could it, could it all be true? Good God, what a truth! Who could

believe it? And how could you give away your last farthing and yet rob

and murder! Ah," she cried suddenly, "that money you gave Katerina

Ivanovna . . . that money. . . . Can that money . . ."



"No, Sonia," he broke in hurriedly, "that money was not it. Don't

worry yourself! That money my mother sent me and it came when I was

ill, the day I gave it to you. . . . Razumihin saw it . . . he

received it for me. . . . That money was mine--my own."



Sonia listened to him in bewilderment and did her utmost to

comprehend.



"And /that/ money. . . . I don't even know really whether there was

any money," he added softly, as though reflecting. "I took a purse off

her neck, made of chamois leather . . . a purse stuffed full of

something . . . but I didn't look in it; I suppose I hadn't time.

. . . And the things--chains and trinkld have sent me what

I needed for the fees and I could have earned enough for clothes,

boots and food, no doubt. Lessons had turned up at half a rouble.

Razumihin works! But I turned sulky and wouldn't. (Yes, sulkiness,

that's the right word for it!) I sat in my room like a spider. You've

been in my den, you've seen it. . . . And do you know, Sonia, that low

ceilings and tiny rooms cramp the soul and the mind? Ah, how I hated

that garret! And yet I wouldn't go out of it! I wouldn't on purpose! I

didn't go out for days together, and I wouldn't work, I wouldn't even

eat, I just lay there doing nothing. If Nastasya brought me anything,

I ate it, if she didn't, I went all day without; I wouldn't ask, on

purpose, from sulkiness! At night I had no light, I lay in the dark

and I wouldn't earn money for candles. I ought to have studied, but I

sold my books; and the dust lies an inch thick on the notebooks on my

table. I preferred lying still and thinking. And I kept thinking.

. . . And I had dreams all the time, strange dreams of all sorts, no

need to describe! Only then I began to fancy that . . . No, that's not

it! Again I am telling you wrong! You see I kept asking myself then:

why am I so stupid that if others are stupid--and I know they are--yet

I won't be wiser? Then I saw, Sonia, that if one waits for everyone to

get wiser it will take too long. . . . Afterwards I understood that

that would never come to pass, that men won't change and that nobody

can alter it and that it's not worth wasting effort over it. Yes,

that's so. That's the law of their nature, Sonia, . . . that's so!

. . . And I know now, Sonia, that whoever is strong in mind and spirit

will have power over them. Anyone who is greatly daring is right in

their eyes. He who despises most things will be a lawgiver among them

and he who dares most of all will be most in the right! So it has been

till now and so it will always be. A man must be blind not to see it!"



Though Raskolnikov looked at Sonia as he said this, he no longer cared

whether she understood or not. The fever had complete hold of him; he

was in a sort of gloomy ecstasy (he certainly had been too long

without talking to anyone). Sonia felt that his gloomy creed had

become his faith and code.



"I divined then, Sonia," he went on eagerly, "that power is only

vouchsafed to the man who dares to stoop and pick it up. There is only

one thing, one thing needful: one has only to dare! Then for the first

time in my life an idea took shape in my mind which no one had ever

thought of before me, no one! I saw clear as daylight how strange it

is that not a single person living in this mad world has had the

daring to go straight for it all and send it flying to the devil! I

. . . I wanted /to have the daring/ . . . and I killed her. I only

wanted to have the daring, Sonia! That was the whole cause of it!"



"Oh hush, hush," cried Sonia, clasping her hands. "You turned away

from God and God has smitten you, has given you over to the devil!"



"Then Sonia, when I used to lie there in the dark and all this became

clear to me, was it a temptation of the devil, eh?"



"Hush, don't laugh, blasphemer! You don't understand, you don't

understand! Oh God! He won't understand!"



"Hush, Sonia! I am not laughing. I know myself that it was the devil

leading me. Hush, Sonia, hush!" he repeated with gloomy insistence. "I

know it all, I have thought it all over and over and whispered it all

over to myself, lying there in the dark. . . . I've argued it all over

with myself, every point of it, and I know it all, all! And how sick,

how sick I was then of going over it all! I have kept wanting to

forget it and make a new beginning, Sonia, and leave off thinking. And

you don't suppose that I went into it headlong like a fool? I went

into it like a wise man, and that was just my destruction. And you

mustn't suppose that I didn't know, for instance, that if I began to

question myself whether I had the right to gain power--I certainly

hadn't the right--or that if I asked myself whether a human being is a

louse it proved that it wasn't so for me, though it might be for a man

who would go straight to his goal without asking questions. . . . If I

worried myself all those days, wondering whether Napoleon would have

done it or not, I felt clearly of course that I wasn't Napoleon. I had

to endure all the agony of that battle of ideas, Sonia, and I longed

to throw it off: I wanted to murder without casuistry, to murder for

my own sake, for myself alone! I didn't want to lie about it even to

myself. It wasn't to help my mother I did the murder--that's nonsense

--I didn't do the murder to gain wealth and power and to become a

benefactor of mankind. Nonsense! I simply did it; I did the murder for

myself, for myself alone, and whether I became a benefactor to others,

or spent my life like a spider catching men in my web and sucking the

life out of men, I couldn't have cared at that moment. . . . And it

was not the money I wanted, Sonia, when I did it. It was not so much

the money I wanted, but something else. . . . I know it all now. . . .

Understand me! Perhaps I should never have committed a murder again. I

wanted to find out something else; it was something else led me on. I

wanted to find out then and quickly whether I was a louse like

everybody else or a man. Whether I can step over barriers or not,

whether I dare stoop to pick up or not, whether I am a trembling

creature or whether I have the /right/ . . ."



"To kill? Have the right to kill?" Sonia clasped her hands.



"Ach, Sonia!" he cried irritably and seemed about to make some retort,

but was contemptuously silent. "Don't interrupt me, Sonia. I want to

prove one thing only, that the devil led me on then and he has shown

me since that I had not the right to take that path, because I am just

such a louse as all the rest. He was mocking me and here I've come to

you now! Welcome your guest! If I were not a louse, should I have come

to you? Listen: when I went then to the old woman's I only went to

/try/. . . . You may be sure of that!"



"And you murdered her!"



"But how did I murder her? Is that how men do murders? Do men go to

commit a murder as I went then? I will tell you some day how I went!

Did I murder the old woman? I murdered myself, not her! I crushed

myself once for all, for ever. . . . But it was the devil that killed

that old woman, not I. Enough, enough, Sonia, enough! Let me be!" he

cried in a sudden spasm of agony, "let me be!"



He leaned his elbows on his knees and squeezed his head in his hands

as in a vise.



"What suffering!" A wail of anguish broke from Sonia.



"Well, what am I to do now?" he asked, suddenly raising his head and

looking at her with a face hideously distorted by despair.



"What are you to do?" she cried, jumping up, and her eyes that had

been full of tears suddenly began to shine. "Stand up!" (She seized

him by the shoulder, he got up, looking at her almost bewildered.) "Go

at once, this very minute, stand at the cross-roads, bow down, first

kiss the earth which you have defiled and then bow down to all the

world and say to all men aloud, 'I am a murderer!' Then God will send

you life again. Will you go, will you go?" she asked him, trembling

all over, snatching his two hands, squeezing them tight in hers and

gazing at him with eyes full of fire.



He was amazed at her sudden ecstasy.



"You mean Siberia, Sonia? I must give myself up?" he asked gloomily.



"Suffer and expiate your sin by it, that's what you must do."



"No! I am not going to them, Sonia!"



"But how will you go on living? What will you live for?" cried Sonia,

"how is it possible now? Why, how can you talk to your mother? (Oh,

what will become of them now?) But what am I saying? You have

abandoned your mother and your sister already. He has abandoned them

already! Oh, God!" she cried, "why, he knows it all himself. How, how

can he live by himself! What will become of you now?"



"Don't be a child, Sonia," he said softly. "What wrong have I done

them? Why should I go to them? What should I say to them? That's only

a phantom. . . . They destroy men by millions themselves and look on

it as a virtue. They are knaves and scoundrels, Sonia! I am not going

to them. And what should I say to them--that I murdered her, but did

not dare to take the money and hid it under a stone?" he added with a

bitter smile. "Why, they would laugh at me, and would call me a fool

for not getting it. A coward and a fool! They wouldn't understand and

they don't deserve to understand. Why should I go to them? I won't.

Don't be a child, Sonia. . . ."



"It will be too much for you to bear, too much!" she repeated, holding

out her hands in despairing supplication.



"Perhaps I've been unfair to myself," he observed gloomily, pondering,

"perhaps after all I am a man and not a louse and I've been in too

great a hurry to condemn myself. I'll make another fight for it."



A haughty smile appeared on his lips.



"What a burden to bear! And your whole life, your whole life!"



"I shall get used to it," he said grimly and thoughtfully. "Listen,"

he began a minute later, "stop crying, it's time to talk of the facts:

I've come to tell you that the police are after me, on my

track. . . ."



"Ach!" Sonia cried in terror.



"Well, why do you cry out? You want me to go to Siberia and now you

are frightened? But let me tell you: I shall not give myself up. I

shall make a struggle for it and they won't do anything to me. They've

no real evidence. Yesterday I was in great danger and believed I was

lost; but to-day things are going better. All the facts they know can

be explained two ways, that's to say I can turn their accusations to

my credit, do you understand? And I shall, for I've learnt my lesson.

But they will certainly arrest me. If it had not been for something

that happened, they would have done so to-day for certain; perhaps

even now they will arrest me to-day. . . . But that's no matter,

Sonia; they'll let me out again . . . for there isn't any real proof

against me, and there won't be, I give you my word for it. And they

can't convict a man on what they have against me. Enough. . . . I only

tell you that you may know. . . . I will try to manage somehow to put

it to my mother and sister so that they won't be frightened. . . . My

sister's future is secure, however, now, I believe . . . and my

mother's must be too. . . . Well, that's all. Be careful, though. Will

you come and see me in prison when I am there?"



"Oh, I will, I will."



They sat side by side, both mournful and dejected, as though they had

been cast up by the tempest alone on some deserted shore. He looked at

Sonia and felt how great was her love for him, and strange to say he

felt it suddenly burdensome and painful to be so loved. Yes, it was a

strange and awful sensation! On his way to see Sonia he had felt that

all his hopes rested on her; he expected to be rid of at least part of

his suffering, and now, when all her heart turned towards him, he

suddenly felt that he was immeasurably unhappier than before.



"Sonia," he said, "you'd better not come and see me when I am in

prison."



Sonia did not answer, she was crying. Several minutes passed.



"Have you a cross on you?" she asked, as though suddenly thinking of

it.



He did not at first understand the question.



"No, of course not. Here, take this one, of cypress wood. I have

another, a copper one that belonged to Lizaveta. I changed with

Lizaveta: she gave me her cross and I gave her my little ikon. I will

wear Lizaveta's now and give you this. Take it . . . it's mine! It's

mine, you know," she begged him. "We will go to suffer together, and

together we will bear our cross!"



"Give it me," said Raskolnikov.



He did not want to hurt her feelings. But immediately he drew back the

hand he held out for the cross.



"Not now, Sonia. Better later," he added to comfort her.



"Yes, yes, better," she repeated with conviction, "when you go to meet

your suffering, then put it on. You will come to me, I'll put it on

you, we will pray and go together."



At that moment someone knocked three times at the door.



"Sofya Semyonovna, may I come in?" they heard in a very familiar and

polite voice.



Sonia rushed to the door in a fright. The flaxen head of Mr.

Lebeziatnikov appeared at the door.







CHAPTER V



Lebeziatnikov looked perturbed.



"I've come to you, Sofya Semyonovna," he began. "Excuse me . . . I

thought I should find you," he said, addressing Raskolnikov suddenly,

"that is, I didn't mean anything . . . of that sort . . . But I just

thought . . . Katerina Ivanovna has gone out of her mind," he blurted

out suddenly, turning from Raskolnikov to Sonia.



Sonia screamed.



"At least it seems so. But . . . we don't know what to do, you see!

She came back--she seems to have been turned out somewhere, perhaps

beaten. . . . So it seems at least, . . . She had run to your father's

former chief, she didn't find him at home: he was dining at some other

general's. . . . Only fancy, she rushed off there, to the other

general's, and, imagine, she was so persistent that she managed to get

the chief to see her, had him fetched out from dinner, it seems. You

can imagine what happened. She was turned out, of course; but,

according to her own story, she abused him and threw something at him.

One may well believe it. . . . How it is she wasn't taken up, I can't

understand! Now she is telling everyone, including Amalia Ivanovna;

but it's difficult to understand her, she is screaming and flinging

herself about. . . . Oh yes, she shouts that since everyone has

abandoned her, she will take the children and go into the street with

a barrel-organ, and the children will sing and dance, and she too, and

collect money, and will go every day under the general's window . . .

'to let everyone see well-born children, whose father was an official,

begging in the street.' She keeps beating the children and they are

all crying. She is teaching Lida to sing 'My Village,' the boy to

dance, Polenka the same. She is tearing up all the clothes, and making

them little caps like actors; she means to carry a tin basin and make

it tinkle, instead of music. . . . She won't listen to anything. . . .

Imagine the state of things! It's beyond anything!"



Lebeziatnikov would have gone on, but Sonia, who had heard him almost

breathless, snatched up her cloak and hat, and ran out of the room,

putting on her things as she went. Raskolnikov followed her and

Lebeziatnikov came after him.



"She has certainly gone mad!" he said to Raskolnikov, as they went out

into the street. "I didn't want to frighten Sofya Semyonovna, so I

said 'it seemed like it,' but there isn't a doubt of it. They say that

in consumption the tubercles sometimes occur in the brain; it's a pity

I know nothing of medicine. I did try to persuade her, but she

wouldn't listen."



"Did you talk to her about the tubercles?"



"Not precisely of the tubercles. Besides, she wouldn't have

understood! But what I say is, that if you convince a person logically

that he has nothing to cry about, he'll stop crying. That's clear. Is

it your conviction that he won't?"



"Life would be too easy if it were so," answered Raskolnikov.



"Excuse me, excuse me; of course it would be rather difficult for

Katerina Ivanovna to understand, but do you know that in Paris they

have been conducting serious experiments as to the possibility of

curing the insane, simply by logical argument? One professor there, a

scientific man of standing, lately dead, believed in the possibility

of such treatment. His idea was that there's nothing really wrong with

the physical organism of the insane, and that insanity is, so to say,

a logical mistake, an error of judgment, an incorrect view of things.

He gradually showed the madman his error and, would you believe it,

they say he was successful? But as he made use of douches too, how far

success was due to that treatment remains uncertain. . . . So it seems

at least."



Raskolnikov had long ceased to listen. Reaching the house where he

lived, he nodded to Lebeziatnikov and went in at the gate.

Lebeziatnikov woke up with a start, looked about him and hurried on.



Raskolnikov went into his little room and stood still in the middle of

it. Why had he come back here? He looked at the yellow and tattered

paper, at the dust, at his sofa. . . . From the yard came a loud

continuous knocking; someone seemed to be hammering . . . He went to

the window, rose on tiptoe and looked out into the yard for a long

time with an air of absorbed attention. But the yard was empty and he

could not see who was hammering. In the house on the left he saw some

open windows; on the window-sills were pots of sickly-looking

geraniums. Linen was hung out of the windows . . . He knew it all by

heart. He turned away and sat down on the sofa.



Never, never had he felt himself so fearfully alone!



Yes, he felt once more that he would perhaps come to hate Sonia, now

that he had made her more miserable.



"Why had he gone to her to beg for her tears? What need had he to

poison her life? Oh, the meanness of it!"



"I will remain alone," he said resolutely, "and she shall not come to

the prison!"



Five minutes later he raised his head with a strange smile. That was a

strange thought.



"Perhaps it really would be better in Siberia," he thought suddenly.



He could not have said how long he sat there with vague thoughts

surging through his mind. All at once the door opened and Dounia came

in. At first she stood still and looked at him from the doorway, just

as he had done at Sonia; then she came in and sat down in the same

place as yesterday, on the chair facing him. He looked silently and

almost vacantly at her.



"Don't be angry, brother; I've only come for one minute," said Dounia.



Her face looked thoughtful but not stern. Her eyes were bright and

soft. He saw that she too had come to him with love.



"Brother, now I know all, /all/. Dmitri Prokofitch has explained and

told me everything. They are worrying and persecuting you through a

stupid and contemptible suspicion. . . . Dmitri Prokofitch told me

that there is no danger, and that you are wrong in looking upon it

with such horror. I don't think so, and I fully understand how

indignant you must be, and that that indignation may have a permanent

effect on you. That's what I am afraid of. As for your cutting

yourself off from us, I don't judge you, I don't venture to judge you,

and forgive me for having blamed you for it. I feel that I too, if I

had so great a trouble, should keep away from everyone. I shall tell

mother nothing /of this/, but I shall talk about you continually and

shall tell her from you that you will come very soon. Don't worry

about her; /I/ will set her mind at rest; but don't you try her too

much--come once at least; remember that she is your mother. And now I

have come simply to say" (Dounia began to get up) "that if you should

need me or should need . . . all my life or anything . . . call me,

and I'll come. Good-bye!"



She turned abruptly and went towards the door.



"Dounia!" Raskolnikov stopped her and went towards her. "That

Razumihin, Dmitri Prokofitch, is a very good fellow."



Dounia flushed slightly.



"Well?" she asked, waiting a moment.



"He is competent, hardworking, honest and capable of real love. . . .

Good-bye, Dounia."



Dounia flushed crimson, then suddenly she took alarm.



"But what does it mean, brother? Are we really parting for ever that

you . . . give me such a parting message?"



"Never mind. . . . Good-bye."



He turned away, and walked to the window. She stood a moment, looked

at him uneasily, and went out troubled.



No, he was not cold to her. There was an instant (the very last one)

when he had longed to take her in his arms and /say good-bye/ to her,

and even /to tell/ her, but he had not dared even to touch her hand.



"Afterwards she may shudder when she remembers that I embraced her,

and will feel that I stole her kiss."



"And would /she/ stand that test?" he went on a few minutes later to

himself. "No, she wouldn't; girls like that can't stand things! They

never do."



And he thought of Sonia.



There was a breath of fresh air from the window. The daylight was

fading. He took up his cap and went out.



He could not, of course, and would not consider how ill he was. But

all this continual anxiety and agony of mind could not but affect him.

And if he were not lying in high fever it was perhaps just because

this continual inner strain helped to keep him on his legs and in

possession of his faculties. But this artificial excitement could not

last long.



He wandered aimlessly. The sun was setting. A special form of misery

had begun to oppress him of late. There was nothing poignant, nothing

acute about it; but there was a feeling of permanence, of eternity

about it; it brought a foretaste of hopeless years of this cold leaden

misery, a foretaste of an eternity "on a square yard of space."

Towards evening this sensation usually began to weigh on him more

heavily.



"With this idiotic, purely physical weakness, depending on the sunset

or something, one can't help doing something stupid! You'll go to

Dounia, as well as to Sonia," he muttered bitterly.



He heard his name called. He looked round. Lebeziatnikov rushed up to

him.



"Only fancy, I've been to your room looking for you. Only fancy, she's

carried out her plan, and taken away the children. Sofya Semyonovna

and I have had a job to find them. She is rapping on a frying-pan and

making the children dance. The children are crying. They keep stopping

at the cross-roads and in front of shops; there's a crowd of fools

running after them. Come along!"



"And Sonia?" Raskolnikov asked anxiously, hurrying after

Lebeziatnikov.



"Simply frantic. That is, it's not Sofya Semyonovna's frantic, but

Katerina Ivanovna, though Sofya Semyonova's frantic too. But Katerina

Ivanovna is absolutely frantic. I tell you she is quite mad. They'll

be taken to the police. You can fancy what an effect that will have.

. . . They are on the canal bank, near the bridge now, not far from

Sofya Semyonovna's, quite close."



On the canal bank near the bridge and not two houses away from the one

where Sonia lodged, there was a crowd of people, consisting

principally of gutter children. The hoarse broken voice of Katerina

Ivanovna could be heard from the bridge, and it certainly was a

strange spectacle likely to attract a street crowd. Katerina Ivanovna

in her old dress with the green shawl, wearing a torn straw hat,

crushed in a hideous way on one side, was really frantic. She was

exhausted and breathless. Her wasted consumptive face looked more

suffering than ever, and indeed out of doors in the sunshine a

consumptive always looks worse than at home. But her excitement did

not flag, and every moment her irritation grew more intense. She

rushed at the children, shouted at them, coaxed them, told them before

the crowd how to dance and what to sing, began explaining to them why

it was necessary, and driven to desperation by their not

understanding, beat them. . . . Then she would make a rush at the

crowd; if she noticed any decently dressed person stopping to look,

she immediately appealed to him to see what these children "from a

genteel, one may say aristocratic, house" had been brought to. If she

heard laughter or jeering in the crowd, she would rush at once at the

scoffers and begin squabbling with them. Some people laughed, others

shook their heads, but everyone felt curious at the sight of the

madwoman with the frightened children. The frying-pan of which

Lebeziatnikov had spoken was not there, at least Raskolnikov did not

see it. But instead of rapping on the pan, Katerina Ivanovna began

clapping her wasted hands, when she made Lida and Kolya dance and

Polenka sing. She too joined in the singing, but broke down at the

second note with a fearful cough, which made her curse in despair and

even shed tears. What made her most furious was the weeping and terror

of Kolya and Lida. Some effort had been made to dress the children up

as street singers are dressed. The boy had on a turban before

morning among some bushes in Krestovsky Island, trembling all over

with fever; he walked home, and it was early morning when he arrived.

After some hours' sleep the fever left him, but he woke up late, two

o'clock in the afternoon.



He remembered that Katerina Ivanovna's funeral had been fixed for that

day, and was glad that he was not present at it. Nastasya brought him

some food; he ate and drank with appetite, almost with greediness. His

head was fresher and he was calmer than he had been for the last three

days. He even felt a passing wonder at his previous attacks of panic.



The door opened and Razumihin came in.



"Ah, he's eating, then he's not ill," said Razumihin. He took a chair

and sat down at the table opposite Raskolnikov.



He was troubled and did not attempt to conceal it. He spoke with

evident annoyance, but without hurry or raising his voice. He looked

as though he had some special fixed determination.



"Listen," he began resolutely. "As far as I am concerned, you may all

go to hell, but from what I see, it's clear to me that I can't make

head or tail of it; please don't think I've come to ask you questions.

I don't want to know, hang it! If you begin telling me your secrets, I

dare say I shouldn't stay to listen, I should go away cursing. I have

only come to find out once for all whether it's a fact that you are

mad? There is a conviction in the air that you are mad or very nearly

so. I admit I've been disposed to that opinion myself, judging from

your stupid, repulsive and quite inexplicable actions, and from your

recent behavior to your mother and sister. Only a monster or a madman

could treat them as you have; so you must be mad."



"When did you see them last?"



"Just now. Haven't you seen them since then? What have you been doing

with yourself? Tell me, please. I've been to you three times already.

Your mother has been seriously ill since yesterday. She had made up

her mind to come to you; Avdotya Romanovna tried to prevent her; she

wouldn't hear a word. 'If he is ill, if his mind is giving way, who

can look after him like his mother?' she said. We all came here

together, we couldn't let her come alone all the way. We kept begging

her to be calm. We came in, you weren't here; she sat down, and stayed

ten minutes, while we stood waiting in silence. She got up and said:

'If he's gone out, that is, if he is well, and has forgotten his

mother, it's humiliating and unseemly for his mother to stand at his

door begging for kindness.' She returned home and took to her bed; now

she is in a fever. 'I see,' she said, 'that he has time for /his

girl/.' She means by /your girl/ Sofya Semyonovna, your betrothed or

your mistress, I don't know. I went at once to Sofya Semyonovna's, for

I wanted to know what was going on. I looked round, I saw the coffin,

the children crying, and Sofya Semyonovna trying them on mourning

dresses. No sign of you. I apologised, came away, and reported to

Avdotya Romanovna. So that's all nonsense and you haven't got a girl;

the most likely thing is that you are mad. But here you sit, guzzling

boiled beef as though you'd not had a bite for three days. Though as

far as that goes, madmen eat too, but though you have not said a word

to me yet . . . you are not mad! That I'd swear! Above all, you are

not mad! So you may go to hell, all of you, for there's some mystery,

some secret about it, and I don't intend to worry my brains over your

secrets. So I've simply come to swear at you," he finished, getting

up, "to relieve my mind. And I know what to do now."



"What do you mean to do now?"



"What business is it of yours what I mean to do?"



"You are going in for a drinking bout."



"How . . . how did you know?"



"Why, it's pretty plain."



Razumihin paused for a minute.



"You always have been a very rational person and you've never been

mad, never," he observed suddenly with warmth. "You're right: I shall

drink. Good-bye!"



And he moved to go out.



"I was talking with my sister--the day before yesterday, I think it

was--about you, Razumihin."



"About me! But . . . where can you have seen her the day before

yesterday?" Razumihin stopped short and even turned a little pale.



One could see that his heart was throbbing slowly and violently.



"She came here by herself, sat there and talked to me."



"She did!"



"Yes."



"What did you say to her . . . I mean, about me?"



"I told her you were a very good, honest, and industrious man. I

didn't tell her you love her, because she knows that herself."



"She knows that herself?"



"Well, it's pretty plain. Wherever I might go, whatever happened to

me, you would remain to look after them. I, so to speak, give them

into your keeping, Razumihin. I say this because I know quite well how

you love her, and am convinced of the purity of your heart. I know

that she too may love you and perhaps does love you already. Now

decide for yourself, as you know best, whether you need go in for a

drinking bout or not."



"Rodya! You see . . . well. . . . Ach, damn it! But where do you mean

to go? Of course, if it's all a secret, never mind. . . . But I . . .

I shall find out the secret . . . and I am sure that it must be some

ridiculous nonsense and that you've made it all up. Anyway you are a

capital fellow, a capital fellow! . . ."



"That was just what I wanted to add, only you interrupted, that that

was a very good decision of yours not to find out these secrets. Leave

it to time, don't worry about it. You'll know it all in time when it

must be. Yesterday a man said to me that what a man needs is fresh

air, fresh air, fresh air. I mean to go to him directly to find out

what he meant by that."



Razumihin stood lost in thought and excitement, making a silent

conclusion.



"He's a political conspirator! He must be. And he's on the eve of some

desperate step, that's certain. It can only be that! And . . . and

Dounia knows," he thought suddenly.



"So Avdotya Romanovna comes to see you," he said, weighing each

syllable, "and you're going to see a man who says we need more air,

and so of course that letter . . . that too must have something to do

with it," he concluded to himself.



"What letter?"



"She got a letter to-day. It upset her very much--very much indeed.

Too much so. I began speaking of you, she begged me not to. Then . . .

then she said that perhaps we should very soon have to part . . . then

she began warmly thanking me for something; then she went to her room

and locked herself in."



"She got a letter?" Raskolnikov asked thoughtfully.



"Yes, and you didn't know? hm . . ."



They were both silent.



"Good-bye, Rodion. There was a time, brother, when I. . . . Never

mind, good-bye. You see, there was a time. . . . Well, good-bye! I

must be off too. I am not going to drink. There's no need now. . . .

That's all stuff!"



He hurried out; but when he had almost closed the door behind him, he

suddenly opened it again, and said, looking away:



"Oh, by the way, do you remember that murder, you know Porfiry's, that

old woman? Do you know the murderer has been found, he has confessed

and given the proofs. It's one of those very workmen, the painter,

only fancy! Do you remember I defended them here? Would you believe

it, all that scene of fighting and laughing with his companions on the

stairs while the porter and the two witnesses were going up, he got up

on purpose to disarm suspicion. The cunning, the presence of mind of

the young dog! One can hardly credit it; but it's his own explanation,

he has confessed it all. And what a fool I was about it! Well, he's

simply a genius of hypocrisy and resourcefulness in disarming the

suspicions of the lawyers--so there's nothing much to wonder at, I

suppose! Of course people like that are always possible. And the fact

that he couldn't keep up the character, but confessed, makes him

easier to believe in. But what a fool I was! I was frantic on their

side!"



"Tell me, please, from whom did you hear that, and why does it

interest you so?" Raskolnikov asked with unmistakable agitation.



 . . and one thing after another! This is the point: I have perhaps

acted unfairly to you; I feel it. Do you remember how we parted? Your

nerves were unhinged and your knees were shaking and so were mine.

And, you know, our behaviour was unseemly, even ungentlemanly. And yet

we are gentlemen, above all, in any case, gentlemen; that must be

understood. Do you remember what we came to? . . . and it was quite

indecorous."



"What is he up to, what does he take me for?" Raskolnikov asked

himself in amazement, raising his head and looking with open eyes on

Porfiry.



"I've decided openness is better between us," Porfiry Petrovitch went

on, turning his head away and dropping his eyes, as though unwilling

to disconcert his former victim and as though disdaining his former

wiles. "Yes, such suspicions and such scenes cannot continue for long.

Nikolay put a stop to it, or I don't know what we might not have come

to. That damned workman was sitting at the time in the next room--can

you realise that? You know that, of course; and I am aware that he

came to you afterwards. But what you supposed then was not true: I had

not sent for anyone, I had made no kind of arrangements. You ask why I

hadn't? What shall I say to you? it had all come upon me so suddenly.

I had scarcely sent for the porters (you noticed them as you went out,

I dare say). An idea flashed upon me; I was firmly convinced at the

time, you see, Rodion Romanovitch. Come, I thought--even if I let one

thing slip for a time, I shall get hold of something else--I shan't

lose what I want, anyway. You are nervously irritable, Rodion

Romanovitch, by temperament; it's out of proportion with other

qualities of your heart and character, which I flatter myself I have

to some extent divined. Of course I did reflect even then that it does

not always happen that a man gets up and blurts out his whole story.

It does happen sometimes, if you make a man lose all patience, though

even then it's rare. I was capable of realising that. If I only had a

fact, I thought, the least little fact to go upon, something I could

lay hold of, something tangible, not merely psychological. For if a

man is guilty, you must be able to get something substantial out of

him; one may reckon upon most surprising results indeed. I was

reckoning on your temperament, Rodion Romanovitch, on your temperament

above all things! I had great hopes of you at that time."



"But what are you driving at now?" Raskolnikov muttered at last,

asking the question without thinking.



"What is he talking about?" he wondered distractedly, "does he really

take me to be innocent?"



"What am I driving at? I've come to explain myself, I consider it my

duty, so to speak. I want to make clear to you how the whole business,

the whole misunderstanding arose. I've caused you a great deal of

suffering, Rodion Romanovitch. I am not a monster. I understand what

it must mean for a man who has been unfortunate, but who is proud,

imperious and above all, impatient, to have to bear such treatment! I

regard you in any case as a man of noble character and not without

elements of magnanimity, though I don't agree with all your

convictions. I wanted to tell you this first, frankly and quite

sincerely, for above all I don't want to deceive you. When I made your

acquaintance, I felt attracted by you. Perhaps you will laugh at my

saying so. You have a right to. I know you disliked me from the first

and indeed you've no reason to like me. You may think what you like,

but I desire now to do all I can to efface that impression and to show

that I am a man of heart and conscience. I speak sincerely."



Porfiry Petrovitch made a dignified pause. Raskolnikov felt a rush of

renewed alarm. The thought that Porfiry believed him to be innocent

began to make him uneasy.



"It's scarcely necessary to go over everything in detail," Porfiry

Petrovitch went on. "Indeed, I could scarcely attempt it. To begin

with there were rumours. Through whom, how, and when those rumours

came to me . . . and how they affected you, I need not go into. My

suspicions were aroused by a complete accident, which might just as

easily not have happened. What was it? Hm! I believe there is no need

to go into that either. Those rumours and that accident led to one

idea in my mind. I admit it openly--for one may as well make a clean

breast of it--I was the first to pitch on you. The old woman's notes

on the pledges and the rest of it--that all came to nothing. Yours was

one of a hundred. I happened, too, to hear of the scene at the office,

from a man who described it capitally, unconsciously reproducing the

scene with great vividness. It was just one thing after another,

Rodion Romanovitch, my dear fellow! How could I avoid being brought to

certain ideas? From a hundred rabbits you can't make a horse, a

hundred suspicions don't make a proof, as the English proverb says,

but that's only from the rational point of view--you can't help being

partial, for after all a lawyer is only human. I thought, too, of your

article in that journal, do you remember, on your first visit we

talked of it? I jeered at you at the time, but that was only to lead

you on. I repeat, Rodion Romanovitch, you are ill and impatient. That

you were bold, headstrong, in earnest and . . . had felt a great deal

I recognised long before. I, too, have felt the same, so that your

article seemed familiar to me. It was conceived on sleepless nights,

with a throbbing heart, in ecstasy and suppressed enthusiasm. And that

proud suppressed enthusiasm in young people is dangerous! I jeered at

you then, but let me tell you that, as a literary amateur, I am

awfully fond of such first essays, full of the heat of youth. There is

a mistiness and a chord vibrating in the mist. Your article is absurd

and fantastic, but there's a transparent sincerity, a youthful

incorruptible pride and the daring of despair in it. It's a gloomy

article, but that's what's fine in it. I read your article and put it

aside, thinking as I did so 'that man won't go the common way.' Well,

I ask you, after that as a preliminary, how could I help being carried

away by what followed? Oh, dear, I am not saying anything, I am not

making any statement now. I simply noted it at the time. What is there

in it? I reflected. There's nothing in it, that is really nothing and

perhaps absolutely nothing. And it's not at all the thing for the

prosecutor to let himself be carried away by notions: here I have

Nikolay on my hands with actual evidence against him--you may think

what you like of it, but it's evidence. He brings in his psychology,

too; one has to consider him, too, for it's a matter of life and

death. Why am I explaining this to you? That you may understand, and

not blame my malicious behaviour on that occasion. It was not

malicious, I assure you, he-he! Do you suppose I didn't come to search

your room at the time? I did, I did, he-he! I was here when you were

lying ill in bed, not officially, not in my own person, but I was

here. Your room was searched to the last thread at the first

suspicion; but /umsonst/! I thought to myself, now that man will come,

will come of himself and quickly, too; if he's guilty, he's sure to

come. Another man wouldn't, but he will. And you remember how Mr.

Razumihin began discussing the subject with you? We arranged that to

excite you, so we purposely spread rumours, that he might discuss the

case with you, and Razumihin is not a man to restrain his indignation.

Mr. Zametov was tremendously struck by your anger and your open

daring. Think of blurting out in a restaurant 'I killed her.' It was

too daring, too reckless. I thought so myself, if he is guilty he will

be a formidable opponent. That was what I thought at the time. I was

expecting you. But you simply bowled Zametov over and . . . well, you

see, it all lies in this--that this damnable psychology can be taken

two ways! Well, I kept expecting you, and so it was, you came! My

heart was fairly throbbing. Ach!



"Now, why need you have come? Your laughter, too, as you came in, do

you rn't enough for him to suffer agony behind the door while

they battered at the door and rung the bell, no, he had to go to the

empty lodging, half delirious, to recall the bell-ringing, he wanted

to feel the cold shiver over again. . . . Well, that we grant, was

through illness, but consider this: he is a murderer, but looks upon

himself as an honest man, despises others, poses as injured innocence.

No, that's not the work of a Nikolay, my dear Rodion Romanovitch!"



All that had been said before had sounded so like a recantation that

these words were too great a shock. Raskolnikov shuddered as though he

had been stabbed.



"Then . . . who then . . . is the murderer?" he asked in a breathless

voice, unable to restrain himself.



Porfiry Petrovitch sank back in his chair, as though he were amazed at

the question.



"Who is the murderer?" he repeated, as though unable to believe his

ears. "Why, /you/, Rodion Romanovitch! You are the murderer," he

added, almost in a whisper, in a voice of genuine conviction.



Raskolnikov leapt from the sofa, stood up for a few seconds and sat

down again without uttering a word. His face twitched convulsively.



"Your lip is twitching just as it did before," Porfiry Petrovitch

observed almost sympathetically. "You've been misunderstanding me, I

think, Rodion Romanovitch," he added after a brief pause, "that's why

you are so surprised. I came on purpose to tell you everything and

deal openly with you."



"It was not I murdered her," Raskolnikov whispered like a frightened

child caught in the act.



"No, it was you, you Rodion Romanovitch, and no one else," Porfiry

whispered sternly, with conviction.



They were both silent and the silence lasted strangely long, about ten

minutes. Raskolnikov put his elbow on the table and passed his fingers

through his hair. Porfiry Petrovitch sat quietly waiting. Suddenly

Raskolnikov looked scornfully at Porfiry.



"You are at your old tricks again, Porfiry Petrovitch! Your old method

again. I wonder you don't get sick of it!"



"Oh, stop that, what does that matter now? It would be a different

matter if there were witnesses present, but we are whispering alone.

You see yourself that I have not come to chase and capture you like a

hare. Whether you confess it or not is nothing to me now; for myself,

I am convinced without it."



"If so, what did you come for?" Raskolnikov asked irritably. "I ask

you the same question again: if you consider me guilty, why don't you

take me to prison?"



"Oh, that's your question! I will answer you, point for point. In the

first place, to arrest you so directly is not to my interest."



"How so? If you are convinced you ought. . . ."



"Ach, what if I am convinced? That's only my dream for the time. Why

should I put you in safety? You know that's it, since you ask me to do

it. If I confront you with that workman for instance and you say to

him 'were you drunk or not? Who saw me with you? I simply took you to

be drunk, and you were drunk, too.' Well, what could I answer,

especially as your story is a more likely one than his? for there's

nothing but psychology to support his evidence--that's almost unseemly

with his ugly mug, while you hit the mark exactly, for the rascal is

an inveterate drunkard and notoriously so. And I have myself admitted

candidly several times already that that psychology can be taken in

two ways and that the second way is stronger and looks far more

probable, and that apart from that I have as yet nothing against you.

And though I shall put you in prison and indeed have come--quite

contrary to etiquette--to inform you of it beforehand, yet I tell you

frankly, also contrary to etiquette, that it won't be to my advantage.

Well, secondly, I've come to you because . . ."



"Yes, yes, secondly?" Raskolnikov was listening breathless.



"Because, as I told you just now, I consider I owe you an explanation.

I don't want you to look upon me as a monster, as I have a genuine

liking for you, you may believe me or not. And in the third place I've

come to you with a direct and open proposition--that you should

surrender and confess. It will be infinitely more to your advantage

and to my advantage too, for my task will be done. Well, is this open

on my part or not?"



Raskolnikov thought a minute.



"Listen, Porfiry Petrovitch. You said just now you have nothing but

psychology to go on, yet now you've gone on mathematics. Well, what if

you are mistaken yourself, now?"



"No, Rodion Romanovitch, I am not mistaken. I have a little fact even

then, Providence sent it me."



"What little fact?"



"I won't tell you what, Rodion Romanovitch. And in any case, I haven't

the right to put it off any longer, I must arrest you. So think it

over: it makes no difference to me /now/ and so I speak only for your

sake. Believe me, it will be better, Rodion Romanovitch."



Raskolnikov smiled malignantly.



"That's not simply ridiculous, it's positively shameless. Why, even if

I were guilty, which I don't admit, what reason should I have to

confess, when you tell me yourself that I shall be in greater safety

in prison?"



"Ah, Rodion Romanovitch, don't put too much faith in words, perhaps

prison will not be altogether a restful place. That's only theory and

my theory, and what authority am I for you? Perhaps, too, even now I

am hiding something from you? I can't lay bare everything, he-he! And

how can you ask what advantage? Don't you know how it would lessen

your sentence? You would be confessing at a moment when another man

has taken the crime on himself and so has muddled the whole case.

Consider that! I swear before God that I will so arrange that your

confession shall come as a complete surprise. We will make a clean

sweep of all these psychological points, of a suspicion against you,

so that your crime will appear to have been something like an

aberration, for in truth it was an aberration. I am an honest man,

Rodion Romanovitch, and will keep my word."



Raskolnikov maintained a mournful silence and let his head sink

dejectedly. He pondered a long while and at last smiled again, but his

smile was sad and gentle.



"No!" he said, apparently abandoning all attempt to keep up

appearances with Porfiry, "it's not worth it, I don't care about

lessening the sentence!"



"That's just what I was afraid of!" Porfiry cried warmly and, as it

seemed, involuntarily. "That's just what I feared, that you wouldn't

care about the mitigation of sentence."



Raskolnikov looked sadly and expressively at him.



"Ah, don't disdain life!" Porfiry went on. "You have a great deal of

it still before you. How can you say you don't want a mitigation of

sentence? You are an impatient fellow!"



"A great deal of what lies before me?"



"Of life. What sort of prophet are you, do you know much about it?

Seek and ye shall find. This may be God's means for bringing you to

Him. And it's not for ever, the bondage. . . ."



"The time will be shortened," laughed Raskolnikov.



"Why, is it the bourgeois disgrace you are afraid of? It may be that

you are afraid of it without knowing it, because you are young! But

anyway /you/ shouldn't be afraid of giving yourself up and

confessing."



"Ach, hang it!" Raskolnikov whispered with loathing and contempt, as

though he did not want to speak aloud.



He got up again as though he meant to go away, but sat down again in

evident despair.



"Hang it, if you like! You've lost faith and you think that I am

grossly flattering you; but how long has your life been? How much do

you understand? You made up a theory and then were ashamed that it

broke down and turned out to be not at all original! It turned out

something base, that's true, but you are not hopelessly base. By no

means so base! At least you didn't deceive yourself for long, you went

straight to the furthest point at one bound. How do I regard you? I

regard you as one of those men who would stand and smile at their

torturer while he cuts their entrails out, if only they have found

faith or God. Find it and you will live. You have long needed a change

of air. Suffering, too, is a good thing. Suffer! Maybe Nikolay is

right in wanting to suffer. I know you don't believe in it--but don't

be over-wise; fling yourself straight into life, without deliberation;

don't be afraid--the flood will bear you to the bank and set you safe

on your feet again. What bank? How can I tell? I only believe that you

have long life before you. I know that you take all my words now for a

set speech prepared beforehand, but maybe you will remember them

after. They may be of use some time. That's why I speak. It's as well

that you only killed the old woman. If you'd invented another theory

you might perhaps have done something a thousand times more hideous.

You ought to thank God, perhaps. How do you know? Perhaps God is

saving you for something. But keep a good heart and have less fear!

Are you afraid of the great expiation before you? No, it would be

shameful to be afraid of it. Since you have taken such a step, you

must harden your heart. There is justice in it. You must fulfil the

demands of justice. I know that you don't believe it, but indeed, life

will bring you through. You will live it down in time. What you need

now is fresh air, fresh air, fresh air!"



Raskolnikov positively started.



"But who are you? what prophet are you? From the height of what

majestic calm do you proclaim these words of wisdom?"



"Who am I? I am a man with nothing to hope for, that's all. A man

perhapes himself in print; besides, he was only twenty-three. It

lasted only a moment. After reading a few lines he frowned and his

heart throbbed with anguish. He recalled all the inward conflict of

the preceding months. He flung the article on the table with disgust

and anger.



"But, however foolish I may be, Rodya, I can see for myself that you

will very soon be one of the leading--if not the leading man--in the

world of Russian thought. And they dared to think you were mad! You

don't know, but they really thought that. Ah, the despicable

creatures, how could they understand genius! And Dounia, Dounia was

all but believing it--what do you say to that? Your father sent twice

to magazines--the first time poems (I've got the manuscript and will

show you) and the second time a whole novel (I begged him to let me

copy it out) and how we prayed that they should be taken--they

weren't! I was breaking my heart, Rodya, six or seven days ago over

your food and your clothes and the way you are living. But now I see

again how foolish I was, for you can attain any position you like by

your intellect and talent. No doubt you don't care about that for the

present and you are occupied with much more important matters. . . ."



"Dounia's not at home, mother?"



"No, Rodya. I often don't see her; she leaves me alone. Dmitri

Prokofitch comes to see me, it's so good of him, and he always talks

about you. He loves you and respects you, my dear. I don't say that

Dounia is very wanting in consideration. I am not complaining. She has

her ways and I have mine; she seems to have got some secrets of late

and I never have any secrets from you two. Of course, I am sure that

Dounia has far too much sense, and besides she loves you and me . . .

but I don't know what it will all lead to. You've made me so happy by

coming now, Rodya, but she has missed you by going out; when she comes

in I'll tell her: 'Your brother came in while you were out. Where have

you been all this time?' You mustn't spoil me, Rodya, you know; come

when you can, but if you can't, it doesn't matter, I can wait. I shall

know, anyway, that you are fond of me, that will be enough for me. I

shall read what you write, I shall hear about you from everyone, and

sometimes you'll come yourself to see me. What could be better? Here

you've come now to comfort your mother, I see that."



Here Pulcheria Alexandrovna began to cry.



"Here I am again! Don't mind my foolishness. My goodness, why am I

sitting here?" she cried, jumping up. "There is coffee and I don't

offer you any. Ah, that's the selfishness of old age. I'll get it at

once!"



"Mother, don't trouble, I am going at once. I haven't come for that.

Please listen to me."



Pulcheria Alexandrovna went up to him timidly.



"Mother, whatever happens, whatever you hear about me, whatever you

are told about me, will you always love me as you do now?" he asked

suddenly from the fullness of his heart, as though not thinking of his

words and not weighing them.



"Rodya, Rodya, what is the matter? How can you ask me such a question?

Why, who will tell me anything about you? Besides, I shouldn't believe

anyone, I should refuse to listen."



"I've come to assure you that I've always loved you and I am glad that

we are alone, even glad Dounia is out," he went on with the same

impulse. "I have come to tell you that though you will be unhappy, you

must believe that your son loves you now more than himself, and that

all you thought about me, that I was cruel and didn't care about you,

was all a mistake. I shall never cease to love you. . . . Well, that's

enough: I thought I must do this and begin with this. . . ."



Pulcheria Alexandrovna embraced him in silence, pressing him to her

bosom and weeping gently.



"I don't know what is wrong with you, Rodya," she said at last. "I've

been thinking all this time that we were simply boring you and now I

see that there is a great sorrow in store for you, and that's why you

are miserable. I've foreseen it a long time, Rodya. Forgive me for

speaking about it. I keep thinking about it and lie awake at nights.

Your sister lay talking in her sleep all last night, talking of

nothing but you. I caught something, but I couldn't make it out. I

felt all the morning as though I were going to be hanged, waiting for

something, expecting something, and now it has come! Rodya, Rodya,

where are you going? You are going away somewhere?"



"Yes."



"That's what I thought! I can come with you, you know, if you need me.

And Dounia, too; she loves you, she loves you dearly--and Sofya

Semyonovna may come with us if you like. You see, I am glad to look

upon her as a daughter even . . . Dmitri Prokofitch will help us to go

together. But . . . where . . . are you going?"



"Good-bye, mother."



"What, to-day?" she cried, as though losing him for ever.



"I can't stay, I must go now. . . ."



"And can't I come with you?"



"No, but kneel down and pray to God for me. Your prayer perhaps will

reach Him."



"Let me bless you and sign you with the cross. That's right, that's

right. Oh, God, what are we doing?"



Yes, he was glad, he was very glad that there was no one there, that

he was alone with his mother. For the first time after all those awful

months his heart was softened. He fell down before her, he kissed her

feet and both wept, embracing. And she was not surprised and did not

question him this time. For some days she had realised that something

awful was happening to her son and that now some terrible minute had

come for him.



"Rodya, my darling, my first born," she said sobbing, "now you are

just as when you were little. You would run like this to me and hug me

and kiss me. When your father was living and we were poor, you

comforted us simply by being with us and when I buried your father,

how often we wept together at his grave and embraced, as now. And if

I've been crying lately, it's that my mother's heart had a foreboding

of trouble. The first time I saw you, that evening, you remember, as

soon as we arrived here, I guessed simply from your eyes. My heart

sank at once, and to-day when I opened the door and looked at you, I

thought the fatal hour had come. Rodya, Rodya, you are not going away

to-day?"



"No!"



"You'll come again?"



"Yes . . . I'll come."



"Rodya, don't be angry, I don't dare to question you. I know I

mustn't. Only say two words to me--is it far where you are going?"



"Very far."



"What is awaiting you there? Some post or career for you?"



"What God sends . . . only pray for me." Raskolnikov went to the door,

but she clutched him and gazed despairingly into his eyes. Her face

worked with terror.



"Enough, mother," said Raskolnikov, deeply regretting that he had

come.



"Not for ever, it's not yet for ever? You'll come, you'll come

to-morrow?"



"I will, I will, good-bye." He tore himself away at last.



It was a warm, fresh, bright evening; it had cleared up in the

morning. Raskolnikov went to his lodgings; he made haste. He wanted to

finish all before sunset. He did not want to meet anyone till then.

Going up the stairs he noticed that Nastasya rushed from the samovar

to watch him intently. "Can anyone have come to see me?" he wondered.

He had a disgusted vision of Porfiry. But opening his door he saw

Dounia. She was sitting alone, plunged in deep thought, and looked as

though she had been waiting a long time. He stopped short in the

doorway. She rose from the sofa in dismay and stood up facing him. Her

eyes, fixed upon him, betrayed horror and infinite grief. And from

those eyes alone he saw at once that she knew.



"Am I to come in or go away?" he asked uncertainly.



"I've been all day with Sofya Semyonovna. We were both waiting for

you. We thought that you would be sure to come there."



Raskolnikov went into the room and sank exhausted on a chair.



"I feel weak, Dounia, I am very tired; and I should have liked at this

moment to be able to control myself."



He glanced at her mistrustfully.



"Where were you all night?"



"I don't remember clearly. You see, sister, I wanted to m. How trivial it all must be, what I am fretting about now! Of

course it must all be interesting . . . in its way . . . (Ha-ha-ha!

What am I thinking about?) I am becoming a baby, I am showing off to

myself; why am I ashamed? Foo! how people shove! that fat man--a

German he must be--who pushed against me, does he know whom he pushed?

There's a peasant woman with a baby, begging. It's curious that she

thinks me happier than she is. I might give her something, for the

incongruity of it. Here's a five copeck piece left in my pocket, where

did I get it? Here, here . . . take it, my good woman!"



"God bless you," the beggar chanted in a lachrymose voice.



He went into the Hay Market. It was distasteful, very distasteful to

be in a crowd, but he walked just where he saw most people. He would

have given anything in the world to be alone; but he knew himself that

he would not have remained alone for a moment. There was a man drunk

and disorderly in the crowd; he kept trying to dance and falling down.

There was a ring round him. Raskolnikov squeezed his way through the

crowd, stared for some minutes at the drunken man and suddenly gave a

short jerky laugh. A minute later he had forgotten him and did not see

him, though he still stared. He moved away at last, not remembering

where he was; but when he got into the middle of the square an emotion

suddenly came over him, overwhelming him body and mind.



He suddenly recalled Sonia's words, "Go to the cross-roads, bow down

to the people, kiss the earth, for you have sinned against it too, and

say aloud to the whole world, 'I am a murderer.'" He trembled,

remembering that. And the hopeless misery and anxiety of all that

time, especially of the last hours, had weighed so heavily upon him

that he positively clutched at the chance of this new unmixed,

complete sensation. It came over him like a fit; it was like a single

spark kindled in his soul and spreading fire through him. Everything

in him softened at once and the tears started into his eyes. He fell

to the earth on the spot. . . .



He knelt down in the middle of the square, bowed down to the earth,

and kissed that filthy earth with bliss and rapture. He got up and

bowed down a second time.



"He's boozed," a youth near him observed.



There was a roar of laughter.



"He's going to Jerusalem, brothers, and saying good-bye to his

children and his country. He's bowing down to all the world and

kissing the great city of St. Petersburg and its pavement," added a

workman who was a little drunk.



"Quite a young man, too!" observed a third.



"And a gentleman," someone observed soberly.



"There's no knowing who's a gentleman and who isn't nowadays."



These exclamations and remarks checked Raskolnikov, and the words, "I

am a murderer," which were perhaps on the point of dropping from his

lips, died away. He bore these remarks quietly, however, and, without

looking round, he turned down a street leading to the police office.

He had a glimpse of something on the way which did not surprise him;

he had felt that it must be so. The second time he bowed down in the

Hay Market he saw, standing fifty paces from him on the left, Sonia.

She was hiding from him behind one of the wooden shanties in the

market-place. She had followed him then on his painful way!

Raskolnikov at that moment felt and knew once for all that Sonia was

with him for ever and would follow him to the ends of the earth,

wherever fate might take him. It wrung his heart . . . but he was just

reaching the fatal place.



He went into the yard fairly resolutely. He had to mount to the third

storey. "I shall be some time going up," he thought. He felt as though

the fateful moment was still far off, as though he had plenty of time

left for consideration.



Again the same rubbish, the same eggshells lying about on the spiral

stairs, again the open doors of the flats, again the same kitchens and

the same fumes and stench coming from them. Raskolnikov had not been

here since that day. His legs were numb and gave way under him, but

still they moved forward. He stopped for a moment to take breath, to

collect himself, so as to enter /like a man/. "But why? what for?" he

wondered, reflecting. "If I must drink the cup what difference does it

make? The more revolting the better." He imagined for an instant the

figure of the "explosive lieutenant," Ilya Petrovitch. Was he actually

going to him? Couldn't he go to someone else? To Nikodim Fomitch?

Couldn't he turn back and go straight to Nikodim Fomitch's lodgings?

At least then it would be done privately. . . . No, no! To the

"explosive lieutenant"! If he must drink it, drink it off at once.



Turning cold and hardly conscious, he opened the door of the office.

There were very few people in it this time--only a house porter and a

peasant. The doorkeeper did not even peep out from behind his screen.

Raskolnikov walked into the next room. "Perhaps I still need not

speak," passed through his mind. Some sort of clerk not wearing a

uniform was settling himself at a bureau to write. In a corner another

clerk was seating himself. Zametov was not there, nor, of course,

Nikodim Fomitch.



"No one in?" Raskolnikov asked, addressing the person at the bureau.



"Whom do you want?"



"A-ah! Not a sound was heard, not a sight was seen, but I scent the

Russian . . . how does it go on in the fairy tale . . . I've

forgotten! 'At your service!'" a familiar voice cried suddenly.



Raskolnikov shuddered. The Explosive Lieutenant stood before him. He

had just come in from the third room. "It is the hand of fate,"

thought Raskolnikov. "Why is he here?"



"You've come to see us? What about?" cried Ilya Petrovitch. He was

obviously in an exceedingly good humour and perhaps a trifle

exhilarated. "If it's on business you are rather early.[*] It's only a

chance that I am here . . . however I'll do what I can. I must admit,

I . . . what is it, what is it? Excuse me. . . ."



[*] Dostoevsky appears to have forgotten that it is after sunset, and

    that the last time Raskolnikov visited the police office at two in

    the afternoon he was reproached for coming too late.--TRANSLATOR.



"Raskolnikov."



"Of course, Raskolnikov. You didn't imagine I'd forgotten? Don't think

I am like that . . . Rodion Ro--Ro--Rodionovitch, that's it, isn't

it?"



"Rodion Romanovitch."



"Yes, yes, of course, Rodion Romanovitch! I was just getting at it. I

made many inquiries about you. I assure you I've been genuinely

grieved since that . . . since I behaved like that . . . it was

explained to me afterwards that you were a literary man . . . and a

learned one too . . . and so to say the first steps . . . Mercy on us!

What literary or scientific man does not begin by some originality of

conduct! My wife and I have the greatest respect for literature, in my

wife it's a genuine passion! Literature and art! If only a man is a

gentleman, all the rest can be gained by talents, learning, good

sense, genius. As for a hat--well, what does a hat matter? I can buy a

hat as easily as I can a bun; but what's under the hat, what the hat

covers, I can't buy that! I was even meaning to come and apologise to

you, but thought maybe you'd . . . But I am forgetting to ask you, is

there anything you want really? I hear your family have come?"



"Yes, my mother and sister."



"I've even had the honour and happiness of meeting your sister--a

highly cultivated and charming person. I confess I was sorry I got so

hot with you. There it is! But as for my looking suspiciously at your

fainting fit--that affair has been cleared up splendidly! Bigotry and

fanaticism! I understand your indignation. Perhaps you are changing

your lodging on account of your family's arriving?"



"No, I only looked in . . . I came to ask . . . I thought that I

should find Zametov here."



"Oh, yes! Of course, you've made friends, I heard. Well, no, Zametov

is not here. Yes, we've lost Zametov. He's not been here since

yesterday . . . he quarrelled with everyone on leaving . . . in the

rudest way. He is a feather-headed youngster, thmade her preparations to

follow the party of convicts in which he was despatched to Siberia.

Not a word passed between Raskolnikov and her on the subject, but both

knew it would be so. At the final leave-taking he smiled strangely at

his sister's and Razumihin's fervent anticipations of their happy

future together when he should come out of prison. He predicted that

their mother's illness would soon have a fatal ending. Sonia and he at

last set off.



Two months later Dounia was married to Razumihin. It was a quiet and

sorrowful wedding; Porfiry Petrovitch and Zossimov were invited

however. During all this period Razumihin wore an air of resolute

determination. Dounia put implicit faith in his carrying out his plans

and indeed she could not but believe in him. He displayed a rare

strength of will. Among other things he began attending university

lectures again in order to take his degree. They were continually

making plans for the future; both counted on settling in Siberia

within five years at least. Till then they rested their hopes on

Sonia.



Pulcheria Alexandrovna was delighted to give her blessing to Dounia's

marriage with Razumihin; but after the marriage she became even more

melancholy and anxious. To give her pleasure Razumihin told her how

Raskolnikov had looked after the poor student and his decrepit father

and how a year ago he had been burnt and injured in rescuing two

little children from a fire. These two pieces of news excited

Pulcheria Alexandrovna's disordered imagination almost to ecstasy. She

was continually talking about them, even entering into conversation

with strangers in the street, though Dounia always accompanied her. In

public conveyances and shops, wherever she could capture a listener,

she would begin the discourse about her son, his article, how he had

helped the student, how he had been burnt at the fire, and so on!

Dounia did not know how to restrain her. Apart from the danger of her

morbid excitement, there was the risk of someone's recalling

Raskolnikov's name and speaking of the recent trial. Pulcheria

Alexandrovna found out the address of the mother of the two children

her son had saved and insisted on going to see her.



At last her restlessness reached an extreme point. She would sometimes

begin to cry suddenly and was often ill and feverishly delirious. One

morning she declared that by her reckoning Rodya ought soon to be

home, that she remembered when he said good-bye to her he said that

they must expect him back in nine months. She began to prepare for his

coming, began to do up her room for him, to clean the furniture, to

wash and put up new hangings and so on. Dounia was anxious, but said

nothing and helped her to arrange the room. After a fatiguing day

spent in continual fancies, in joyful day-dreams and tears, Pulcheria

Alexandrovna was taken ill in the night and by morning she was

feverish and delirious. It was brain fever. She died within a

fortnight. In her delirium she dropped words which showed that she

knew a great deal more about her son's terrible fate than they had

supposed.



For a long time Raskolnikov did not know of his mother's death, though

a regular correspondence had been maintained from the time he reached

Siberia. It was carried on by means of Sonia, who wrote every month to

the Razumihins and received an answer with unfailing regularity. At

first they found Sonia's letters dry and unsatisfactory, but later on

they came to the conclusion that the letters could not be better, for

from these letters they received a complete picture of their

unfortunate brother's life. Sonia's letters were full of the most

matter-of-fact detail, the simplest and clearest description of all

Raskolnikov's surroundings as a convict. There was no word of her own

hopes, no conjecture as to the future, no description of her feelings.

Instead of any attempt to interpret his state of mind and inner life,

she gave the simple facts--that is, his own words, an exact account of

his health, what he asked for at their interviews, what commission he

gave her and so on. All these facts she gave with extraordinary

minuteness. The picture of their unhappy brother stood out at last

with great clearness and precision.  There could be no mistake,

because nothing was given but facts.



But Dounia and her husband could get little comfort out of the news,

especially at first. Sonia wrote that he was constantly sullen and not

ready to talk, that he scarcely seemed interested in the news she gave

him from their letters, that he sometimes asked after his mother and

that when, seeing that he had guessed the truth, she told him at last

of her death, she was surprised to find that he did not seem greatly

affected by it, not externally at any rate. She told them that,

although he seemed so wrapped up in himself and, as it were, shut

himself off from everyone--he took a very direct and simple view of

his new life; that he understood his position, expected nothing better

for the time, had no ill-founded hopes (as is so common in his

position) and scarcely seemed surprised at anything in his

surroundings, so unlike anything he had known before. She wrote that

his health was satisfactory; he did his work without shirking or

seeking to do more; he was almost indifferent about food, but except

on Sundays and holidays the food was so bad that at last he had been

glad to accept some money from her, Sonia, to have his own tea every

day. He begged her not to trouble about anything else, declaring that

all this fuss about him only annoyed him. Sonia wrote further that in

prison he shared the same room with the rest, that she had not seen

the inside of their barracks, but concluded that they were crowded,

miserable and unhealthy; that he slept on a plank bed with a rug under

him and was unwilling to make any other arrangement. But that he lived

so poorly and roughly, not from any plan or design, but simply from

inattention and indifference.



Sonia wrote simply that he had at first shown no interest in her

visits, had almost been vexed with her indeed for coming, unwilling to

talk and rude to her. But that in the end these visits had become a

habit and almost a necessity for him, so that he was positively

distressed when she was ill for some days and could not visit him. She

used to see him on holidays at the prison gates or in the guard-room,

to which he was brought for a few minutes to see her. On working days

she would go to see him at work either at the workshops or at the

brick kilns, or at the sheds on the banks of the Irtish.



About herself, Sonia wrote that she had succeeded in making some

acquaintances in the town, that she did sewing, and, as there was

scarcely a dressmaker in the town, she was looked upon as an

indispensable person in many houses. But she did not mention that the

authorities were, through her, interested in Raskolnikov; that his

task was lightened and so on.



At last the news came (Dounia had indeed noticed signs of alarm and

uneasiness in the preceding letters) that he held aloof from everyone,

that his fellow prisoners did not like him, that he kept silent for

days at a time and was becoming very pale. In the last letter Sonia

wrote that he had been taken very seriously ill and was in the convict

ward of the hospital.







II



He was ill a long time. But it was not the horrors of prison life, not

the hard labour, the bad food, the shaven head, or the patched clothes

that crushed him. What did he care for all those trials and hardships!

he was even glad of the hard work. Physically exhausted, he could at

least reckon on a few hours of quiet sleep. And what was the food to

him--the thin cabbage soup with beetles floating in it? In the past as

a student he had often not had even that. His clothes were warm and

suited to his manner of life. He did not even feel the fetters. Was he

ashamed of his shaven head and parti-coloured coat? Before whom?

Before Sonia? Sonia was afraid of him, how could he be ashamed before

her? And yet he was ashamed even before Sonia, whom he tortured

becaud come to Europe from the

depths of Asia. All were to be destroyed except a very few chosen.

Some new sorts of microbes were attacking the bodies of men, but these

microbes were endowed with intelligence and will. Men attacked by them

became at once mad and furious. But never had men considered

themselves so intellectual and so completely in possession of the

truth as these sufferers, never had they considered their decisions,

their scientific conclusions, their moral convictions so infallible.

Whole villages, whole towns and peoples went mad from the infection.

All were excited and did not understand one another. Each thought that

he alone had the truth and was wretched looking at the others, beat

himself on the breast, wept, and wrung his hands. They did not know

how to judge and could not agree what to consider evil and what good;

they did not know whom to blame, whom to justify. Men killed each

other in a sort of senseless spite. They gathered together in armies

against one another, but even on the march the armies would begin

attacking each other, the ranks would be broken and the soldiers would

fall on each other, stabbing and cutting, biting and devouring each

other. The alarm bell was ringing all day long in the towns; men

rushed together, but why they were summoned and who was summoning them

no one knew. The most ordinary trades were abandoned, because everyone

proposed his own ideas, his own improvements, and they could not

agree. The land too was abandoned. Men met in groups, agreed on

something, swore to keep together, but at once began on something

quite different from what they had proposed. They accused one another,

fought and killed each other. There were conflagrations and famine.

All men and all things were involved in destruction. The plague spread

and moved further and further. Only a few men could be saved in the

whole world. They were a pure chosen people, destined to found a new

race and a new life, to renew and purify the earth, but no one had

seen these men, no one had heard their words and their voices.



Raskolnikov was worried that this senseless dream haunted his memory

so miserably, the impression of this feverish delirium persisted so

long. The second week after Easter had come. There were warm bright

spring days; in the prison ward the grating windows under which the

sentinel paced were opened. Sonia had only been able to visit him

twice during his illness; each time she had to obtain permission, and

it was difficult. But she often used to come to the hospital yard,

especially in the evening, sometimes only to stand a minute and look

up at the windows of the ward.



One evening, when he was almost well again, Raskolnikov fell asleep.

On waking up he chanced to go to the window, and at once saw Sonia in

the distance at the hospital gate. She seemed to be waiting for

someone. Something stabbed him to the heart at that minute. He

shuddered and moved away from the window. Next day Sonia did not come,

nor the day after; he noticed that he was expecting her uneasily. At

last he was discharged. On reaching the prison he learnt from the

convicts that Sofya Semyonovna was lying ill at home and was unable to

go out.



He was very uneasy and sent to inquire after her; he soon learnt that

her illness was not dangerous. Hearing that he was anxious about her,

Sonia sent him a pencilled note, telling him that she was much better,

that she had a slight cold and that she would soon, very soon come and

see him at his work. His heart throbbed painfully as he read it.



Again it was a warm bright day. Early in the morning, at six o'clock,

he went off to work on the river bank, where they used to pound

alabaster and where there was a kiln for baking it in a shed. There

were only three of them sent. One of the convicts went with the guard

to the fortress to fetch a tool; the other began getting the wood

ready and laying it in the kiln. Raskolnikov came out of the shed on

to the river bank, sat down on a heap of logs by the shed and began

gazing at the wide deserted river. From the high bank a broad

landscape opened before him, the sound of singing floated faintly

audible from the other bank. In the vast steppe, bathed in sunshine,

he could just see, like black specks, the nomads' tents. There there

was freedom, there other men were living, utterly unlike those here;

there time itself seemed to stand still, as though the age of Abraham

and his flocks had not passed. Raskolnikov sat gazing, his thoughts

passed into day-dreams, into contemplation; he thought of nothing, but

a vague restlessness excited and troubled him. Suddenly he found Sonia

beside him; she had come up noiselessly and sat down at his side. It

was still quite early; the morning chill was still keen. She wore her

poor old burnous and the green shawl; her face still showed signs of

illness, it was thinner and paler. She gave him a joyful smile of

welcome, but held out her hand with her usual timidity. She was always

timid of holding out her hand to him and sometimes did not offer it at

all, as though afraid he would repel it. He always took her hand as

though with repugnance, always seemed vexed to meet her and was

sometimes obstinately silent throughout her visit. Sometimes she

trembled before him and went away deeply grieved. But now their hands

did not part. He stole a rapid glance at her and dropped his eyes on

the ground without speaking. They were alone, no one had seen them.

The guard had turned away for the time.



How it happened he did not know. But all at once something seemed to

seize him and fling him at her feet. He wept and threw his arms round

her knees. For the first instant she was terribly frightened and she

turned pale. She jumped up and looked at him trembling. But at the

same moment she understood, and a light of infinite happiness came

into her eyes. She knew and had no doubt that he loved her beyond

everything and that at last the moment had come. . . .



They wanted to speak, but could not; tears stood in their eyes. They

were both pale and thin; but those sick pale faces were bright with

the dawn of a new future, of a full resurrection into a new life. They

were renewed by love; the heart of each held infinite sources of life

for the heart of the other.



They resolved to wait and be patient. They had another seven years to

wait, and what terrible suffering and what infinite happiness before

them! But he had risen again and he knew it and felt it in all his

being, while she--she only lived in his life.



On the evening of the same day, when the barracks were locked,

Raskolnikov lay on his plank bed and thought of her. He had even

fancied that day that all the convicts who had been his enemies looked

at him differently; he had even entered into talk with them and they

answered him in a friendly way. He remembered that now, and thought it

was bound to be so. Wasn't everything now bound to be changed?



He thought of her. He remembered how continually he had tormented her

and wounded her heart. He remembered her pale and thin little face.

But these recollections scarcely troubled him now; he knew with what

infinite love he would now repay all her sufferings. And what were

all, /all/ the agonies of the past! Everything, even his crime, his

sentence and imprisonment, seemed to him now in the first rush of

feeling an external, strange fact with which he had no concern. But he

could not think for long together of anything that evening, and he

could not have analysed anything consciously; he was simply feeling.

Life had stepped into the place of theory and something quite

different would work itself out in his mind.



Under his pillow lay the New Testament. He took it up mechanically.

The book belonged to Sonia; it was the one from which she had read the

raising of Lazarus to him. At first he was afraid that she would worry

him about religion, would talk about the gospel and pester him with

books. But to his great surprise she had not once approached the

subject and had not even offered him the Testament. He had asked her

for it himself not long before his illness and she brought him the

book without a word. Till now he had not opened it.



He did not open it now, but one thought passed through his mind: "Can

her convictions not be mine now? Her feelings, her aspirations at

least. . . ."



She too had been greatly agitated that day, and at night she was taken

ill again. But she was so happy--and so unexpectedly happy--that she

was almost frightened of her happiness. Seven years, /only/ seven

years! At the beginning of their happiness at some moments they were

both ready to look on those seven years as though they were seven

days. He did not know that the new life would not be given him for

nothing, that he would have to pay dearly for it, that it would cost

him great striving, great suffering.



But that is the beginning of a new story--the story of the gradual

renewal of a man, the story of his gradual regeneration, of his

passing from one world into another, of his initiation into a new

unknown life. That might be the subject of a new story, but our

present story is ended.











End of The Project Gutenberg Etext Crime and Punishment, by Dostoevsky


 